1 
 THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890  
______  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Title, extent and commencement.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts of Wards and Chartered High Courts.  
4. Definitions.  
4A. Power to confer jurisdiction on subordinate judicial officers and to transfer proceedings  
    to such officers.  
CHAPTER II  
APPOINTMENT  AND DECLARATION  OF GUARDIANS  
5. [Omitted .]. 
6. Saving of power to appoint in other cases.  
7. Power of the Court to make order as to guardianship.  
8. Persons entitled to apply for order.  
9. Court having jurisdiction to entertain application.  
10. Form of application.  
11. Procedure on admission of application.  
12. Power to make interlocutory order for production of minor and interim  protection of  
    person and property.  
13. Hearing of evidence before making of o rder. 
14. Simultaneous proceedings in different Courts.  
15. Appointment or declaration of several guardians.  
16. Appointment or declaration of guardian for property beyond jurisdiction of the Court.  
17. Matters to be consid ered by the Court in appointing guardian.  
18. Appointment or declaration of Collector in virtue of office.  
19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases.  2 
 CHAPTER III 
DUTIES , RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES OF GUARDIANS  
General  
SECTIONS  
20. Fiduciary relation of guardian to ward.  
21. Capacity of minors to act as guardians.  
22. Remuneration of guardian.  
23. Control of Collector as guardian.  
Guardian of the person  
24. Duties of guardian of the person.  
25. Title of guardian to custody of ward.  
26. Removal of war from jurisdiction.  
Guardian of property  
27.  Duties of guardian of pro perty.  
28. Powers of testamentary guardian.  
29. Limitation of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court.  
30. Voidability of transfers made in contravention of section 28 or section 29.  
31. Practice with respect to permitting transfe rs under section 29.  
32. Variation of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court.  
33. Right of guardian so appointed or declared to apply to the Court for opinion in management of 
property, of ward.  
34. Obligations on guardian of pro perty appointed or declared by the Court.  
34A. Power to award remuneration for auditing accounts.  
35. Suit against guardian where administration -bond was taken.  
36. Suit against guardian where administration -bond was not taken.  
37. General liability of gu ardian as trustee.  
Termination of guardianship  
38. Right of survivorship among joint guardians.  
39. Removal of guardian.  
40. Discharge of guardian.  
41. Cessation of authority of guardian.  
42. Appointment of successor to guardian dead, discharged or removed.  
CHAPTER IV  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
43. Orders for regulating conduct or proceedings of guardians, and enforcement of those orders.  
44. Penalty for removal of ward from jurisdiction.  3 
 SECTIONS  
45. Penalty for contumacy.  
46. Reports by C ollectors and subordinate Courts.  
47. Orders appealable.  
48. Finality of other orders.  
49. Costs.  
50. Power of High Court to make rules.  
51. Applicability of Act to guardians already appointed by Court.  
52. [Repealed .]. 
53. [Repealed .]. 
THE SCHEDULE.  — [Repealed .]. 4 
 THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890  
ACT NO. 8 OF 18901 
[21st March, 1890.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Guardian and Ward.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to guardian and ward; It is 
hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Title, extent and commencement. — (1) This Act may be called the Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890.  
(2) It extends to th e whole of India 2***, 
3*   *  *  4*** 
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of July, 1890.  
2. [Repeal .] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts of Wards and Chartered High Courts. — This Act shall be 
read subject to every enactment heretofore or hereafter passed relating to any Court of Wards by 5[any 
competent legislature, authority or person in 6[any State to which this Act extends]], and nothing in  
this Act shall be construed to affect, or in any way derogate from the jurisdiction or authority of any 
Court of Wards, or to take away any power possessed by 7[any High Court  8***]. 
4. Definitions. — In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the  subject or                    
context, — 
(1) “minor ” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875, (9 of 
1875) is to be deemed not to have attained his majority:  
(2) “guardian ” mean ’s a person having the care of the person of a  minor or of his property, or of 
both is person and property:  
(3) “ward ” means a minor for whose person or property, or both, there is a guardian:  
(4) “District Court ” has the meaning assigned to that expression in the 9Code of Civil                
                                                      
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I, to the whole of the Union 
territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. and to Sikkim vide Notifn. No. S.O. 644(E), dated 24 -81984, 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, s. 3(ii) (w.e.f. 1 -9-1984).  
This Act has been extended to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, with the following modification:  
In section 1, after sub -section (2), insert: — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of  
Pondiche rry.”.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
    (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
3. The words “inclusive of British Baluchistan” rep by A.O. 1948 . 
4. The word “and” omitted by Act 40 of 1949, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, fo r “the G.G. in C., or by a Governor or Lieutenant -Governor in Council”.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for “Part A States and Part C States”.  
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “any High Court established under the Statute 24 and 25 Victoria, Ch. 104 (an Act 
for establishing High Courts of Judicature in India)”.  
8. The words “established in Part A States and Part C States” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
9. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).   5 
 Procedure (14 of 1882) , and includes a High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction:  
1[(5) “the Court ” means —  
(a) the District Court having jurisdiction to entertain an application under this                    
Act for an order appointing or declaring a person to be a guardian; or  
(b) where a guardian has been appointed or declared in pursuance of any such application —  
(i) the Court which, or the Court of the officer who, appointed or declared the guardian or 
is under this Act deemed to have appointed or declared the guardian; or  
(ii) in any matter relating to the person of the ward the District Court having jurisdiction 
in the place where the ward for the time being ordinarily resides; or  
(c) in respect of any proc eeding transferred under section 4A, the Court of the officer to 
whom such proceeding has been transferred:]  
(6) “Collector ” means the chief officer in charge of the revenue —administration of a district, 
and includes any officer whom the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, may, 
by name or in virtue of his office, appoint to be a Collector in any local are a, or with respect to any 
class of persons, for all or any of the purposes of this Act:  
2*      *    *   *; and 
(8) “prescribed ”  means prescribed by rules made by the High Court under this Act.  
3[4A. Power to confer jurisdiction on subordinate judicial of ficers and to transfer 
proceedings to such officers. —(1) The High Court may, by general or special order, empower any 
officer exercising original civil jurisdiction subordinate to a District Court, or authori se the Judge of 
any District Court to empower an y such officer subordinate to him, to dispose of any proceedings 
under this Act transferred to such officer under the provisions of this section.  
(2) The Judge of a District Court may, by order in writing, transfer at any stage any proceeding 
under this Ac t pending in his Court for disposal to any officer subordinate to him empowered under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The Judge of a District Court may at any stage transfer to his own Court or to any officer 
subordinate to him empowered under sub -section ( 1) any pro ceeding under this Act pending in the 
Court of any other such officer.  
(4) When any proceedings ar e transferred under this section in any case in which a guardian has 
been appointed or declared, the Judge of the District Court may, by order in writing, dec lare that the 
Court of the Judge or officer to whom they ar e transferred shall, for all or any of the purposes of this 
Act, be deemed to be the Court which appointed or declared the guardian.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 2, for the clause ( 5). 
2. Clause ( 7) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 3.  6 
 CHAPTER II  
APPOINTMENT  AND DECLARATION OF GUARDIANS  
5. [Power of parents to appoint in case of European British subjects .] Omitted  by the Part B  States 
(Laws ) Act, 1951 (3 of 1951), s. 3 and Sch edule . 
6. Saving of power to appoint in other cases. —In the case of a minor 1***, nothing in this Act 
shall be construed to take away or derogate from any power to appoint a guardian of his person or 
property, or both, which is valid by the law to which the minor is subject.  
7. Power of the Court to make order as to guardianship. —(1) where the Court is satisf ied that 
it is for the welfare of a minor that an order should be made —  
(a) appointing a guardian of his person or property, or both, or  
(b) declaring a person to be such a guardian,  
the Court may make an order accordingly.  
(2) An order under this sectio n shall imply the removal of any guardian who has not been 
appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by the Court.  
(3) Where a guardian has been appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by 
the Court, an order unde r this section appointing or declaring another person to be guardian in his  
stead shall not be made until the powers of the guardian appointed or declared as aforesaid have 
ceased under the provisions of this Act.  
8. Persons entitled to apply for order. —An order shall not be made under the last foregoing 
section except on the application of —  
(a) the person desirous of   being, or claiming to be, the guardian of the minor, or  
(b) any relative or friend of the minor, or  
(c) the Collector of the district or  other local area within which the minor ordinarily resides or 
in which he has property, or  
(d) the Collector having authority with respect to the class to which the minor belongs.  
9. Court having jurisdiction to entertain application. —(1) If the applicati on is with respect to 
the guardianship of the person of the minor, it shall be made to the District Court having jurisdiction 
in the place where the minor ordinarily resides.  
(2) If the application is with respect to the guardianship of the property of the  minor, it may be 
made either to the District Court having jurisdiction in the place where the minor ordinarily resides or 
to a District Court having jurisdiction in a place where he has property.  
(3) If an application with respect to the guardianship of t he property of a minor is made to a 
District Co urt other than that having jurisdiction in the place where the minor ordinarily resides, the 
Court may return the application if in its opinion the application would be disposed of more justly or 
conveniently by any other District Court having jurisdiction.  
10. Form of application. —(1) If the application is not made by the Collector, it shall be by 
petition signed and verified in manner prescribed by the 2Code ,of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) for 
the signing an d verification of a plaint, and stating, so far as can be ascertained —  
(a) the name, sex, religion, date of birth and ordinary residence of the minor;  
(b) where the minor is a female, whether she is married, and, if so, the name and age of her 
husband;  
(c) the nature, situation and approximate value of the property, if any, of the minor;  
                                                      
1. The words “who is not an European British subject” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  7 
 (d) the name and residence of the person having the custody or possession of the person or 
property of the minor;  
(e) what near relations the minor has, and  where they reside;  
(f) whether a guardian of the person or property, or both, of the minor has been appointed by 
any person entitled or claiming to be entitled by the law to which the minor is subject to make such 
an appointment;  
(g) whether an applicatio n has at any time been made to the Court or to any other Court with 
respect to the guardianship of the person or property, or both, of the minor, and, if so, when, to 
what Court and with what result;  
(h) whether the application is for the appointment or de claration of a guardian of the person of 
the minor, or of his property, or of both;  
(i) where the application is to appoint a guardian, the qualifications of the proposed guardian;  
(j) where the application is to declare a person to be a guardian, the grounds on which that 
person claims;  
(k) the causes which have led to the making of the applications; and  
(l) such other particulars, if any, as may be prescribed or as the nature of the application renders 
it necessary to state.  
(2) If the application is made by the Collector, it shall be by letter addressed to the Court and 
forwarded by post or in such other manner as may be found convenient, and shall state as far as 
possible the particulars mentioned in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The application must be accom panied by a declaration of the willingness of the proposed 
guardian to act and the declaration must be signed by him and attested by at least two 
witnesses.  
11. Procedure on admission of application. —(1) If the Court is satisfied that there is ground 
for p roceeding on the application, it shall fix a day for the hearing thereof, and cause notice of the 
application and of the date fixed for the hearing — 
(a) to be served in the manner directed in the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) on —  
(i) the parents of the minor if they arc residing in 2[any State to which this Act extends],  
(ii) the person, if any, named in the petition or letter as having the custody or possession of 
the person or property of the minor,  
(iii) the person proposed in the a pplication or letter to be appointed or declared guardian, 
unless that person is himself the applicant, and  
(iv) any other person to whom, in the opinion of the Court, special notice of the application 
should be given; and  
(b) to be posted on some conspicu ous part of the court -house, and of the residence of the minor, 
and otherwise published in such manner as the Court, subject to any rules made by the High Court 
under this Act, thinks fit.  
(2) The State Government may, by general or special order, require that, when any part of the 
property described in a petition under section 10, sub -section ( 1), is land of which a Court of Wards 
could assume the superintendence, the Court shall also cause a notice as aforesaid to be served on the 
Collector in whose distr ict the minor ordinarily resides, and on  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.   8 
 every Collector in whose district any portion of the land is situate, and the Collector may cause the 
notice to be published in any manner he deems fit.  
(3) No charge shall be made by the Court or the  Collector for the service or publication of any 
notice served or published under sub -section ( 2). 
12. Power to make interlocutory order for production of minor and interim protec tion of 
person and property. —(1) The Court may direct that the person, if an y, having the custody of the 
minor shall produce him or cause him to be produced at such place and time and before such person 
as it appoints, and may make such order for the temporary custody and protection of the person or 
property of the minor as it thi nks proper.  
(2) If the minor is a female who ought not to be compelled to appear in public, the direction under 
sub-section ( 1) for her production shall require her to be produced in accordance with the customs and 
manners of the country.  
(3) Nothing in th is section shall authori se—  
(a) the Court to place a female minor in the temporary custody of a person claiming to be her 
guardian on the ground of his being her husband, unless she is already in his custody with the 
consent of her parents, if any, or  
(b) any person to whom the temporary custody and protection of the property of a minor is 
entrusted to dispossess otherwise than by due course of law any person in possession of any of the 
property.  
13. Hearing of evidence before making of order. —On the day f ixed for the hearing of the 
application, or as soon afterwards as may be, the Court shall hear such evi dence as may be adduced in 
support of or in opposition to the application.  
14. Simultaneous proceedings in different Courts. —(1) If proceedings for the appointment or 
declaration of a guardian of a minor arc taken in more Courts than one, each of those Courts shall, on 
being apprised of the proceedings in the other Court or Courts, stay the proceedings before itself.  
(2) If the Courts arc both or all subo rdinate to the same High Court, they shall report the case to the 
High Court, and the High Court shall determine in which of the Courts the proceedings with respect to 
the appointment or declaration of a guar dian of the minor shall be had.  
1[(3) In any ot her case in which proceedings arc stayed under. sub -section ( 1), the Courts shall 
report the case to, and be guided by such orders as they may receive from, their respective State 
Governments]  
15. Appointment or declaration of several guardians. —(1) If the  law to which the minor is 
subject admits of his having two or more joint guardians of his person or property, or both, the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, appoint or declare them.  
2*   *                      *              *               *       
(4) Separate guardians may be appointed or declared of the person and of the property of a minor.  
(5) If a minor has several properties, the Court may, if it thinks fit, appoint or declare a separate 
guardian for any one or more of the properties.  
16. Appointment or declaration of guardian for property beyond jurisdiction of the   
Court .—If the Court appoints or declares a guardian for any property situate beyond the                
local limits of its jurisdiction, the Court having jur isdiction in the place where the
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for sub -section ( 3).    
2. Sub -section s (2) and ( 3) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  9 
 property is situate shall, on production of a certified copy of the order appointing or declaring the 
guardian, accept him as duly appointed or declared and give effect to the order.  
17. Matters to be considered by the Cour t in appointing guardian. —(1) In appointing or 
declaring the guardian of a minor, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be guided 
by what, consistently with the law to which the minor is subject, appears in the circumstances to be 
for the welfare of the minor. 
(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the minor, the Court shall have regard to the age, 
sex and religion of the minor, the character and capacity of the proposed guardian and his nearness of 
kin to the minor, the wi shes, if any, of a deceased parent, and any existing or previous relations of the 
proposed guardian with the minor or his property.  
(3) If the minor is old enough to form an intelligent preference, the Court may consider that 
preference.  
1*     *      *   *              * 
(5) The Court shall not appoint or declare any person to be a guardian against his will.  
18. Appointment or declaration of Collector in virtue of office. —Where a Collector is 
appointed or declared by the Court in virtue of his office to be  guardian of the person or property, or 
both, of a minor, the order appointing or declaring him shall be deemed to authorize and require the 
person for the time being holding the office to act as guardian of the minor with respect to his person 
or property , or both, as the case may be.  
19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases. —Nothing in this Chapter shall 
authori se the Court to appoint or declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is 
under the superintendence of a Co urt of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian of the person —  
(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not, in the opinion of the Court, 
unfit to be guardian of her person, or  
2[(b) of a minor, other than a married female, whose fath er or mother is living and is not, in the 
opinion of the court, unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or. ] 
(c) of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a Court of Wards competent to 
appoint a guardian of the person of the minor.  
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES , RIGHTS  AND LIABILITIES  OF GUARDIANS  
General  
20.  Fiduciary relation of guardian to ward. —(1) A guardian stands in a fiduciary relation to his 
ward, and, save as provided by the will or other instrument, if any, by which he was appointed, or by 
this Act, he must not make any profit out of his office.  
(2) The fiduciary relation of it guardian to his ward extends to and affects purchases by the 
guardian of the property of the ward, and by the ward of the property of the guardian, i mmediately or 
soon after the ward has ceased to be a minor, and generally all transactions between them while the 
influence of the guardian still lasts or is recent.  
21. Capacity of minors to act as guardians. —A minor is incompetent to act as guardian of a ny 
minor except his own wife or child or  where he is the managing member of an undivided Hindu 
family, the wife  or child of another minor Member of that family.  
                                                      
1. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2010, s. 2 for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 31 -8-2010).  10 
 22. Remuneration of guardian. —(1) A guardian appointed or declared by the Cour t shall be 
entitled to such allowance, if any, as the Court thinks fit for his care and paints in the execution of his 
duties.  
(2) When an officer of the Government, as such officer, is so appointed or declared to be guardian, 
such fees shall be paid to th e Government out of the property of the ward as the State Government, by 
general or special order, directs.  
23. Control of Collector as guardian. —A Collector appointed or declared by the Court to be 
guardian of the person or property, or both, of a minor s hall, in all matters connected with the 
guardianship of his ward, be subject to the control of the State Government or of such authority as that 
Government, by 1notification in the Official Gazette, appoints in this behalf.  
Guardian of the person  
24. Duties of guardian of the person. —A guardian of the person of a ward is charged with 
the custody of the ward and must look to his support, health and education, and such other matters as 
the law to which the ward is subject requires.  
25. Title of guardian to custody of ward. —(1) If a ward leaves or is removed from the custody 
of a guardian of his person, the Court, if it is of opinion that it will be for the welfare of the ward to 
return to the custody of his guardian, may make an order for his return, and for the purpose of 
enforcing the order may cause the ward to be arrested and to be delivered into the custody of the 
guardian.  
(2) For the purpose of arresting the ward, the Court may exercise the power conferred on a 
Magistrate of the first class by secti on 100 of the 2Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882).  
(3) The residence of a ward against the will of his guardian with a person who is not his guardian 
does not of itself terminate the guardianship.  
26. Removal of ward from jurisdiction. —(1) A gua rdian of the person appointed or declared 
by the Court unless he is the Collector or is a guardian appointed by will or other instrument, shall 
not, without the leave of the Court by which he was appointed or declared, remove the ward from 
the limits of its jurisdiction except for such purposes as may be prescribed.  
(2) The leave granted by the Court under sub -section (1) may be special or general, and may be 
defined by the order granting it.  
Guardian of property  
27. Duties of guardian of property. —A guar dian of the property of a ward is bound to deal 
therewith as carefully as a man of ordinary prudence would deal with it if it were his own, and, 
subject to the provisions of this Chapter, he may do all acts which are reasonable and proper for the 
realisati on, protection or benefit of the property.  
28. Powers of testamentary guardian. —Where a guardian has been appointed by will or other 
instrument, his power to mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, 
immovable property belonging  to his ward is subject to any restriction which may be imposed by the 
instrument, unless he has under this Act been declared guardian and the Court which made die 
declaration permits him by an order in writing, notwithstanding the restriction, to dispose of any 
immovable property specified in the order in a manner permitted by the order.  
29. Limitati on of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the 
Court .—Where  a person other than a Collector,  or than a guardian appointed by will or other  
                                                      
1. For notifications appointing authorities to whose control Collectors appointed under the Act shall be subject, see different 
local R. & O.  
2. See now the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1 898 (Act 5 of 1898).  
 11 
 instrum ent, has been appointed or declared by the Court to be guardian of the property of a ward, he 
shall not, without the previous permission of the Court, —  
(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, any pa rt of the 
immovable property of his ward, or  
(b) lease any part of that property for a term exceeding five years or for any term extending 
more than one year beyond the date on which the ward will cease to be a minor.  
30. Viodability  of transfers made in c ontravention of section 28 or section 29. —A disposal of 
immovable property by a guardian in contravention of either of the two last foregoing sections is 
voidable at the instance of any other person affected thereby.  
31. Practice with respect to permitting  transfers under section 29. —(1) Permission to the 
guardian to do any of the acts mentioned in section 29 shall not be granted by the Court except in case 
of necessity or for an evident advantage to the ward.  
(2) The order granting the permission shall rec ite the necessity or advantage, as the case may 
be, describe the property with respect to which the act permitted is to be done, and specify such 
conditions, if any, as the Court may see fit to attach to the permission; and it shall be recorded, 
dated and signed by the Judge of the Court with his own hand, or, when from any cause he is 
prevented from recording the order with his own hand, shall be taken down in writing from his 
dictation and be dated and signed by him.  
(3) The Court may in its discretion attach to the permission the following among other conditions, 
namely: —  
(a) that a sale shall not be completed without the sanction of the Court;  
(b) that a sale shall be made to the highest bidder by public auction, before the Court or 
some person specially appointed by the Court for that purpose, a t a time and place to be 
specified by the Court, after such proclamation of the intended sale as the Court, subject to 
any rules made under this Act by the High Court, directs;  
(c) that a lease shall not be made in consideration of a premium or shall be made for such term 
of years and subje ct to such rents and covenants as the Court directs;  
(d) that the whole or any part of the proceeds of the act permitted shall be paid into the 
Court by the guardian, to  be disbursed therefrom or to be invested by the Court on 
prescribed securities or to be otherwise disposed of as the Court directs.  
(4) Before granting permission to a guardian to do an act mentioned in section 29, the Court 
may cause notice of the applic ation for the permission to be given to any relative or friend of the 
ward who should, in its opinion, receive notice thereof, and shall hear and record the statement of 
any person who appears in opposition to the application.  
32. Variation of powers of gu ardian of property appointed or declared by the Court. —
Where a guardian of the property of a ward has been appointed or declared by the Court and such 
guardian is not the Collector, the Court may, from time to time, by order, define, restrict or extend 
his powers with respect to the property of the ward in such manner and to such extent as it may 
consider to be for the advantage of the ward and consistent with the law to which the ward is 
subject.  
33. Right of guardian so appointed or declared to apply to t he Court for opinion in 
management of property of ward. —(1) A guardian appointed or declared by the Court may 
apply by petition to the Court which appointed or declared him for its opinion, advice or direction 
on any present question respecting the management or administration of the property of his ward.  
(2) If the Court considers the question to be proper for summary disposal, it shall cause a copy of 
the petition to be served on, and the hearing thereof may be attended by, such of the persons inte rested 
in the application as the Court thinks fit.  12 
 (3) The guardian stating in good faith the facts in the petition and acting upon the opinion, advice 
or direction given by the Court shall be deemed, so far as regards his own responsibility, to have 
performed his duty as guardian in the subject -matter of the application.  
34. Obligations on guardian of property appointed  or declared by the Court. —Where a 
guardian of the property of a ward has been appointed or declared by the Court and such gua rdian is 
not the Collector, he shall, —  
(a) if so required by the Court, give a bond, as nearly as may be in the prescribed form, to the 
Judge of the Court to ensure for the benefit of the Judge for the time being, with or without 
sureties, as may be presc ribed, engaging duly to account for what he may receive in respect of the 
property of the ward;  
(b) if so required by the Court, deliver to the Court, within six months from the date of his 
appointment or declaration by the Court, or within such other time  as the Court directs, a statement 
of the immovable property belonging to the ward, of the money and other movable property which 
he has received on behalf of the ward up to the date of delivering the statement, and of the debts 
due on that date to or from  the ward;  
(c) if so required by the Court, exhibit his accounts in the Court at such times and in such form 
as the Court from time to time directs;  
(e) if so required by the Court, pay into the Court at such time as the Court directs the balance 
due from him on those accounts, or so much thereof as the Court directs; and  
(f) apply for the maintenance, education and advancement of the ward and of such per sons as 
are dependent on him, and for the celebration of ceremonies to which the ward or any of those 
persons may be a party, such portion of the income of the property of the ward as the Court from 
time to time directs, and, if the Court so directs, the whole or any part of that property.  
1[34A. Power to award remuneration for auditing accounts. —When accoun ts are exhibited by 
a guardian of the property of a ward in pursuance of a requisition made under clause ( c) of section 34 
or otherwise, the Court may appoint a person to audit the accounts, and may direct that remuneration 
for the work be paid out of the income of the property.]  
35. Suit against guardian where administration bond was taken. —Where a guardian appointed 
or declared by the Court has given a bond duly to account for what he may receive in respect of the 
property of his ward, the Court may, on application made by petition and on being satisfied that the 
engagement of the bond has not been kept, and upon such terms as to security, or providing that any 
money received be paid into the Court, or otherwise as the Court thinks fit, assign the bond to  some 
proper person, who shall thereupon be entitled to sue on the bond in his own name as if the bond had 
been originally given to him instead of to the Judge of the Court, and shall be entitled to recover 
thereon, as trustee for the ward, in respect of a ny breach thereof.  
36. Suit against guardian where administration bond was not taken. —(1) Where a guardian 
appointed or declared by the Court has not given a bond as aforesaid, any person, with the leave of the 
Court, may, as next friend, at any time durin g the continuance of the minority of the ward, and upon 
such terms as aforesaid, institute a suit against the guardian, or, in case of his death, against his 
representative, for an account of what the guardian has received in respect of the property of the  ward, 
and may recover in the suit, as trustee for the ward, such amount as may be found to be payable by the 
guardian or his representative, as the case may be.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1929, s. 2.  13 
 (2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, so far as they relate to a suit ag ainst a guardian, be 
subject to the provisions of section 440 of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) as amended by 
this Act1. 
37. General liability of guardian as trustee. —Nothing in either of the two last foregoing sections 
shall be construed to depr ive a ward or his representative of any remedy against his guardian, or the 
representative of the guardian, which, not being expressly provided in either of those sections, any 
other beneficiary or his representative would have against his trustee or the r epresentative of the 
trustee.  
Termination of guardianship  
38. Right of survivorship among joint guardians. —On the death of one of two or more joint 
guardians, the guardianship continues to the survivor or survivors until a further appointment is made 
by th e Court.  
39. Removal of guardian.  —The Court may, on the application of any person interested, or of its 
own motion, remove a guardian appointed or declared by the Court, or a guardian appointed by will or 
other instrument, for any of the following causes,  namely: —  
(a) for abuse of his trust;  
(b) for continued failure to perform the duties of his trust;  
(c) for incapacity to perform the duties of his trust;  
(d) for ill -treatment, or neglect to take proper care, of his ward;  
(e) for contumacious disregard of any provision of this Act or of any order of the Court;  
(f) for conviction of an offence implying, in the opinion of the Court, a defect of character 
which unfits him to be the guardian of his ward;  
(g) for having an interest adv erse to the faithful performance of his duties;  
(h) for ceasing to reside within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court;  
(i) in the case of a guardian of the property, for bankruptcy or insolvency;  
(j) by reason of the guardianship of the guardi an ceasing, or being liable to cease, under the law 
to which the minor is subject:  
Provided that a guardian appointed by will or other instrument, whether he has been declared 
under this Act or not, shall not be removed —  
(a) for the cause mentioned in cla use ( g) unless the adverse interest accrued after the death of 
the person who appointed him, or it is shown that that person made and maintained the 
appointment in ignorance of the existence of the adverse interest, or  
(b) for the cause mentioned in clause  (h) unless such guardian has taken up such a residence as, 
in the opinion of the Court, renders it impracticable for him to discharge the functions of guardian.  
40. Discharge of guardian. —(1) If a guardian appointed or declared by the Court desires to res ign 
his office, he may apply to the Court to be discharged.  
(2) If the Court finds that there is sufficient reason for the application, it shall discharge him, and if 
the guardian making the application is the Collector and the State Government approves of  his 
applying to be discharged, the Court shall in any case discharge him.  
41. Cessation of authority of guardian. —(1) The powers of a guardian of the person cease —  
(a) by his death, removal or discharge;  
(b) by the Court of Wards assuming superintendence  of the person of the  ward;  
 
                                                      
1. See now Order  XXXII, rules 1 and 4( 2), in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 
1908).  14 
 (c) by the ward ceasing to be a minor;  
(d) in the case of a female ward, by her marriage to a husband who is not unfit to be guardian of 
her person or, if the guardian was appointed or declared by the Court, by her marriage to a husband 
who is not, in the opinion of the Court, so unfit; or  
(e) in the case of a ward whose father was unfit to be guardian of the person of the ward, by the 
father ceasing to be so or, if the father was deemed by the Court to be so unfit, by his ceasi ng to be 
so in the opinion of the Court.  
(2) The powers of a guardian of the property cease —  
(a) by his death, removal or discharge;  
(b) by the Court of Wards assuming superintendence of the property of the ward; or  
(c) by the ward ceasing to be a minor.  
(3) When for any cause the powers of a guardian cease, the Court may require him or, if he is dead, 
his representative to deliver as it directs any property in his possession or control belonging to the 
ward or any accounts in his possession or control rel ating to any past or present property of the ward.  
(4) When he has delivered the property or accounts as required by the Court, the Court may 
declare him to be discharged from his liabilities save as regards any fraud which may subsequently be 
discovered.  
42. Appointment to successor to guardian dead, discharged or removed. —When a guar dian 
appointed or declared by the Cowl is discharged, or, under the law to which the ward is subject, 
ceases to be entitled to act, or when any such guardian or a guardian ap pointed by will or other 
instrument is removed or dies, the Court, of its own motion or on application under Chapter II, may, if 
the ward is still a minor, appoint or declare another guardian of his person or property, or both, as the 
case may be.  
CHAPTER IV 
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
43. Orders for regulating conduct or proceedings of guardians, and enforcement of those 
orders. —(1) The Court may, on the application of any person interested or of its own motion, make 
an order regulating the conduct or proceedings of any guardian appointed or declared by the Court.  
(2) Where there ar e more guardians than one of a ward, and they are unable to agree upon a 
question affecting his welfare, any of them may apply to the Court for its direction, and the Court may 
make such order respecting the matter in difference as it thinks fit.  
(3) Except  where it appears that the object of making an order under sub -section ( 1) or                 
sub-section ( 2) would be defeated by the delay, the Court shall, before making the order, direct notice 
of the application therefor or of the intention of the Cou rt to make it, as the case may be, to be given, 
in a case under sub -section ( 1), to the guardian or, in a case under sub -section ( 2), to the guardian who 
has not made the application  
(4) In case of disobedience to an order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the order 
may be enforced in the same manner as an injunction granted under section 492 or section 493 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), in a case under sub -section ( 1), as if the ward were the plaintiff 
and the guardian were the d efendant or, in a case under sub -section ( 2), as if the guardian who made 
the application were the plaintiff and the other guardian were the defendant.  15 
  (5) Except in a case under sub -section ( 2), nothing in this section shall apply to a Col lector who is, 
as such, a guardian.  
44. Penalty for removal of ward from jurisdiction. —If, for the purpose or with the effect of 
preventing the Court from exercising its authority with respect to a ward, a guardian appointed or 
declared by the Court remove s the ward from the limits of the jurisdiction of the Court in 
contravention of the provisions of section 26, he shall be liable, by order of the Court, to find not 
exceeding one thousand rupees, or to imprisonment in the civil jail for a term which may ex tend to six 
months.  
45. Penalty for contumacy. —(1) In the following cases, namely: —  
(a) if a person having the custody of a minor fails to produce him or cause him to be produced 
in compliance with a direction under section 12, sub -section ( 1), or to do h is utmost to compel the 
minor to return to the custody of his guardian in obedience to an order under section 25,                       
sub-section ( 1), or 
(b) if a guardian appointed or declared by the Court fails to deliver to the Court, within the time 
allowed by or under clause ( b) of section 34, a statement required under that clause, or to exhibit 
accounts in compliance with a requisition under clause ( c) of that section, or to pay into the Court 
the balance due from him on those accounts in complianc e with a requisition under clause ( d) of 
that section, or  
(c) if a person who has ceased to be a guardian, or the representative of such a p erson, fails to 
deliver any property or accounts in compliance with a requisition under section 41, sub -section ( 3), 
the person, guardian or repre sentative, as the case may be, shall be liable, by order of the Court, to 
fine not exceeding one hundred rupees, and in case of recusancy to further fine not exceeding ten 
rupees for each day after the first during which the d efault continues, and not exceeding five hundred 
rupees in the aggregate, and to detention in the civil jail until he undertakes to produce the minor or 
cause him to be produced, or to compel his return, or to deliver the statement, or to exhibit the 
accou nts, or to pay the balance, or to deliver the property or accounts, as the case may be.  
(2) If a person who has been released from detention on giving an undertaking under                   
sub-section ( 1) fails to carry out the undertaking within the tim e allowed by the Court, the Court may 
cause him to be arrested and re -committed to the civil jail.  
46. Reports by Collectors and subordinate Courts. —(1) The Court may call upon the Collector, 
or upon any court subordinate to the Court, for a report on any matter arising in any proceeding under 
this Act and treat the report as evidence.  
(2) For the purpose of preparing the report the Collector or the Judge of the subordinate Court as 
the case may be, shall make such inquiry as he deems necessary, and may for  the pruposes of the 
inquiry exercise any power of compelling the attendance of a witness to give evidence or produce a 
document which is conferred on a Court by the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882).  
47. Orders appealable. — An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order made by a 2*** 
Court, —  
(a) under section 7, appointing or declaring or refusing to appoint or declare a guardian; or,  
(b) under section 9, sub -section ( 3), returning an application ; or,  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. The word “District” rep. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 4.  16 
 (c) under section 25, making  or refusing to make an order for the return of a ward to the 
custody of his guardian; or,  
(d) under section 26, refusing leave for, the removal of award from the limits of the jurisdiction 
of the Court, or imposing conditions with respect thereto; or,  
(e) under section 28 or section 29, refusing permission to a guardian to do an act referred to in 
the section; or,  
(f) under section 32, defining, restricting or extending the powers of a guardian ; or,  
(g) under section 39, removing a guardian ; or,  
(h) unde r section 40, refusing to discharge a guardian; or,  
(i) under section 43, regulating the conduct or proceedings of a guardian or settling a matter in 
difference between joint guardians, or enforcing the order ; or,  
(j) under section 44 or section 45, impos ing a penalty.  
48. Finality of other orders. —Save as provided by the last foregoing section and by 1section 622 
of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), an order made under this Act shall be final and shall not 
be liable to be contested by suit or othe rwise.  
49. Costs. —The costs of any proceeding under this Act, including the costs of maintaining a 
guardian or other person in the civil jail, shall, subject to any rules made by the High Court under this 
Act, be in the discretion of the Court in which the  proceeding is had.  
50. Power of High Court to make rules. —(1) In addition to any other power to make rules 
conferred expressly or impliedly by this Act, the High Court may from time to time make rules 
consistent with this Act —  
(a) as to the matters respe cting which, and the time at which, reports should be called for from 
Collectors and subordinate Courts;  
(b) as to the allowances to be granted to, and the security to be required from, guardians, and 
the cases in which such allowances should be granted;  
(c) as to the procedure to be followed with respect to applications of guardians for permission 
to do acts referred to in sections 28 and 29 ;  
(d) as to the circumstances in which such requisitions as arc mentioned in clauses ( a), (b), (c) 
and ( d) of sectio n 34 s hould be made ;  
(e) as to the preservation of statements and accounts delivered and exhibited by guardians ;  
(ff) as to the inspection of those statements and accounts by persons interested ;  
2[(ff) as to the audit of accounts under section 34A, the class of persons who should be 
appointed to audit accounts, and the scales of remuneration to be granted to them; ] 
(g) as to the custody of money, and securities for money, belonging to wards ;  
(h) as to the securities on which money belonging to wards may  be invested ;  
(i) as to the education of wards for whom guardians, not being Collectors, have been appointed 
or declared by the Court ; and,  
(j) generally, for the guidance of the Courts in carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Rules under clauses ( a) and ( 1) of sub -section ( 1) shall not have effect until they have been 
approved by the State Government, nor shall any rule under this section have effect until it has been 
published in the Official Gazette.  
                                                      
1. See now s. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. Ins. by Act 17 of 1929, s. 3.  17 
 51. Applicability of Act to guardians already appointed by Court. —A guardian appointed by, 
or holding a certificate of administration from, a Civil Court under any enactment repealed by this Act 
shall, save as may be prescribed, be subject to the provisions of this Act, and of the ru les made under 
it, as if he had been appointed or declared by the C ourt under Chapter II.  
52. [Amendment of Indian Majority Act .] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the 
Schedule . 
53. [Amendment of Chapter XXXI of the Code of Civil Proced ure.] Rep. by the Code of Civil 
Procedure,  1908 (5 of 1908), s. 156 and the Fifth Schedule . 
THE SCHEDULE .—[Enactments repealed .] Rep. by the Repealing Act,  1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and 
the Schedule . 
 
______  
1 THE ARYA MARRIAGE VALIDATION ACT, 1937  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Marriage between Arya Samajists not to be invalid.  2 THE ARYA MARRIAGE VALIDATION ACT, 1937  
ACT NO. 19 OF 19371 
 [14th April , 1937 .] 
An Act to recognise and remove doubts as to the validity of inter -marriages current among Arya 
Samajists.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to recognise and place beyond doubt the validity of inter -marriages of a 
class of Hindus known as Arya Samajists; It is hereby enacted as follows :— 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Arya Marriage Validation Act, 1937.  
2[(2) It extends to the whole of India ex cept 3[the territories which, immediately before the                        
1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States] and applies also to citizens of India wherever they 
may be.]  
2. Marriage between Arya Samajists not to be invalid .—Notwithstanding any provision of Hindu 
Law, usage or custom to the contrary no marriage contracted whether before or after the commencement 
of this Act between two persons being at the time of the marriag e Arya Samajists shall be invalid or shall 
be deemed over to have been invalid by reason only of the fact that the parties at any time belonged to 
different castes or different sub -castes of Hindus or that either or both of the parties at any time before t he 
marriage belonged to a religion other than Hinduism.  
 
 
———————  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for sub -section ( 2). 
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.  
1 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
Short  title.
Inter-
pretation.An Act to Provide for the promotion and protection of consumer
interests, in relation to the supply of goods and the provision ofservices in order to ensure protection of life, health and safety ofconsumers and others, the establishment of a Consumer AffairsCommission and for connected purposes.
[                                     ]
B
E IT ENACTED  by The Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Senate and House ofRepresentatives of Jamaica, and by the authority of the same, asfollows:—
1.  This Act may be cited as the Consumer Protection Act, 2005,
and shall come into operation on a date to be appointed by theMinister by notice published in the Gazette .
P
ART I.  Interpretation
2.—(1)  In this Act unless the context otherwise requires—
“acquire” in relation to—
(a) goods, includes obtaining by way of gift, purchase,
or exchange, the taking on lease, hire or hirepurchase; andJAMAICA
No.       — 2005
I assent,
[L.S.]
      ——————————————
                      Governor-General.
 ——————————————2 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
(b)  services, includes accepting the provision of those
services;
“advertisement” means any form of communication made to the
public or a section of the public for the purpose ofpromoting goods or services and “advertise” shall be
construed accordingly;
“business” includes a professional practice or any other
undertaking that is carried on for gain or reward or in thecourse of which goods or services are supplied otherwise
than for free of charge;
“consumer” in relation to—
(a) any goods, means—
(i) any person who acquires or wishes to
acquire goods for his own private use orconsumption; and
(ii) a commercial undertaking that purchases
consumer goods;
(b) any services or facilities, means any person who
employs or wishes to be provided with the servicesor facilities; and
(c) any accommodation, means any person who wishes
to occupy the accommodation;
“document” includes, in addition to a document in writing—
(a) any map, plan, graph or drawing;(b) any photograph;(c) any disc, tape, sound track or other data (not being
visual images) which are embodied so as to becapable (with or without the aid of some other
equipment) of being reproduced therefrom; or
(d) any film (including microfilm), negative, tape or other
device in which one or more visual images areembodied so as to be capable (with or without the
aid of some other equipment) of being reproduced
therefrom;3 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
“goods” includes all kinds of property other than real property,
securities, money or choses in action;
“hire purchase agreement” means an agreement for the bailment
of goods under which the bailee may buy the goods, or
under which the property in the goods will or may passto the bailee;
“negligence” means the breach—
(a) of any obligation, arising from the express or implied
terms of a contract, to take reasonable care to
exercise reasonable skill in the performance of the
contract;
(b) of any common law duty to take reasonable care or
exercise reasonable skill in the performance of a
contract; or
(c) of the common duty of care imposed by the
Occupiers’ Liability Act; and
“provider” in relation to—
(a) any goods, means any person who sells goods;
(b) any services or facilities, means any person who
provides services or facilities.
(2)  In this Act a reference to—
(a) the acquisition of goods includes a reference to the
acquisition of property in, or rights in relation to, goods,in pursuance of a supply of the goods;
(b) the supply or acquisition of goods or services includes a
reference to an agreement to supply or acquire goods orservices;
(c) the supply or acquisition of services includes a reference
to the supply or acquisition of goods together with otherproperty or services; and4 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
(d) the supply or acquisition of services includes a reference
to the supply or acquisition of services together withproperty or other services or both.
3.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), this Act shall apply to all
persons involved in trade or business whether through the purchasingor vending of goods or services.
(2)  The Minister may by order, subject to affirmative resolution,
exempt categories of trade or business from the application of this Act.
4.  Any organization purporting to provide services for the
protection of consumers shall be a non-profit organization the purposeof which is to—
(a) promote and protect consumer rights;
(b) represent the collective interests of consumers before
judicial or administrative bodies;
(c) represent consumers’ interests to government and persons
engaged in the business of producing, supplying ordistributing goods or providing services; and
(d) collect, process and disseminate objective information for
the benefit of consumers.
P
ART II.  Establishment and Functions of the Commission
5.—(1)  There shall be established for the purposes of this Act a
body to be called the Consumer Affairs Commission (hereinafter inthis Act referred to as the Commission), which shall be a bodycorporate to which the provisions of section 28 of the InterpretationAct shall apply.
(2)  The provisions of the First Schedule shall have effect as
to the constitution of the Commission and otherwise in relationthereto.
6.—(1)  Subject to subsection (3), the Commission shall—
(a) carry out, at the request of a consumer who has been
adversely affected, such investigations in relation to the saleApplication.
Establishment
of ConsumerAffairsCommission.Criteria for
organizationspurporting toprovideservices forprotection ofconsumers.
First
Schedule.
Functions of
Commission.5 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
of goods or the provision of services as will enable it to
determine whether the goods were sold or the serviceswere provided in contravention of this Act and thereafterto make such report and recommendations in connectiontherewith as it thinks fit to the Minister;
(b) carry out, on its own initiative, such other investigations in
relation to the availability of goods of any class ordescription as it thinks fit and make such report andrecommendations as it thinks fit to the Minister;
(c) promote the development of organizations formed for the
protection of the consumer and ensure that they fulfill thecriteria listed in section 4;
(d) collect, compile and analyze information in relation to any
trade or business;
(e) provide information to consumers on their rights as
consumers and any other form of consumer education;
(f) implement education programmes for the benefit of
consumers, suppliers and service providers;
(g) seek to resolve disagreements between consumers and
providers; and
(h) carry out such other functions as the Minister may assign
to the Commission from time to time.
(2)  Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Commission
may, for the purpose of exercising or discharging any of its functionsunder this Act, do anything and enter into any transaction which, inthe opinion of the Commission, is necessary to ensure the properexercise or discharge of its functions.
(3)  The Commission shall investigate, in the manner provided
in sections 7 to 12, any action alleged to have been taken by aprovider to the disadvantage of the complainant.6 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
PART III.  Administration
7.—(1)  A complaint to the Commission may be made by any
person or body of persons, whether incorporated or not, who claims
to have suffered a disadvantage in relation to the acquisition of goods
or services.
(2)  Where the complainant—
(a) is a minor, the complaint may be made by his parent or
guardian; or
(b) is unable to act for himself by reason of infirmity or any
other cause or has died, the complaint may be made by
a member of his family or his personal representative.
(3)  Every complaint to the Commission may be made orally
or in writing.
(4)  The Commission may, upon the request of a complainant
as specified in subsection (2), represent that complainant in the event
that litigation is contemplated.
(5)  Where litigation is contemplated by the complainant in
relation to a complaint that was not in writing, the Commission shall
obtain from the complainant a written version of the complaint signed
by the complainant.
8.—(1)  The Commission may, in its absolute discretion, determine
whether to undertake or continue an investigation under this act and
in particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing,may refuse to undertake or continue any investigation if it is of the
opinion that—
(a) the subject matter of the complaint is trivial;(b) the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or not made in good
faith;
(c) the complainant has delayed for too long the making of
his complaint;
(d) the complainant does not have a sufficient interest in the
subject matter of the complaint;Complaints
made to theCommission.
Discretion
not toconductinvestigation.7 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
(e) the subject matter of the complaint should more
appropriately be dealt with by another body or another
forum; or
(f) having regard to all the circumstances of the case—
(i) further investigation is not necessary; or
(ii) no investigation is possible or necessary.
(2)  Where the Commission decides not to undertake or
continue the investigation of a complaint, it shall, in writing, inform
the complainant of that decision and give reasons therefor.
9.—(1)  The Commission shall not be precluded from conducting
an investigation in respect of any matter by reason only that it is open
to the complainant to apply to the court for redress under any otherenactment.
(2)  If any question arises as to whether the Commission has
jurisdiction to investigate any case or class of case under this Act,the Commission or any provider whose actions are under investigation
may apply to the Supreme Court for a declaration determining that
question.
(3)  The fact that an action is commenced in any court in
connection with a matter under investigation by the Commission shall
not, unless the court otherwise directs, preclude such investigation.
10.—(1)  The Commission shall have power to summon any
person to attend before the Commission in relation to an investigation
being conducted by it and to give evidence or to produce anydocument which is—
(a) in the possession or under the control of such person; and
(b) relevant to the matter under investigation.
(2)  A summons under this section—
(a) shall be in the form prescribed in the Second Schedule;
and
(b) may be served by a district constable, bailiff or an officer
of the Commission so authorized.Power to
investigatenot
precluded.
Summoning
persons to
give
evidence.
Second
Schedule.8 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
11.—(1)  All persons summoned to attend and give evidence or
to produce a document before the Commission shall be—
(a) entitled, in respect of such evidence or the disclosure of
any communication or the production of any suchdocument, to the same right or privilege as before a courtof law; and
(b) entitled to be paid their expenses, including travelling
expenses, at the rates prescribed by the Witnesses’Expenses Act for witnesses who are entitled to have theirexpenses paid from public funds:
Provided that the Commission may, if it thinks fit, disallow the
whole or any part of such expenses in any case.
(2)  Any person who—
(a) without sufficient cause, fails or refuses to attend before
the Commission in obedience to a summons under this Act,or fails or refuses to produce any document which he wasrequired by such summons to produce;
(b) being a witness, leaves the Commission without the
permission of the Commission;
(c) being a witness, refuses, without sufficient cause, to answer
any question put to him by or with the permission of theCommission; or
(d) wilfully obstructs or interrupts the proceedings of the
Commission,
commits an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction before
a Resident Magistrate to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousanddollars or in default of payment thereof to imprisonment for a termnot exceeding two years.
12.  In all legal proceedings any paper, book, record or document
produced to the Commission pursuant to section 10 shall be receivedas prima facie  evidence of the truth of the statements contained
therein.
Paper, book,
record ordocument as
evidence.Obligations
of personssummoned.9 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
13. The funds and resources of the Commission shall consist of—
(a) such moneys as may from time to time be placed at its
disposition for the purposes of this Act by Parliament;
(b) all other moneys and other property which may in any
manner become payable to, or vested in the Commission
in respect of any matter incidental to its functions.
14.—(1)  The Commission shall keep proper accounts and other
records in relation to its business and shall prepare annually a
statement of accounts in a form satisfactory to the Minister, being aform which shall conform with established accounting principles.
(2)  The accounts of the Commission shall be audited
annually by an auditor or auditors appointed annually by theCommission and approved by the Minister.
(3)  The Auditor-General shall be entitled at all reasonable
times to examine the accounts and other records in relation to thebusiness of the Commission.
15.—(1)  The Commission shall, in each year—
(a)  on or before the 31st day of July, submit to the Minister a
report of its activities during the twelve months ending on
the 31st day of March in that year, including a statement
of its accounts audited in accordance with the provisionsof section 14;
(b) on or before the 30th day of September, submit to the
Minister for his approval its estimates of revenue andexpenditure for the financial year next following.
(2)  The Minister shall cause copies of reports submitted
pursuant to subsection (1)(a) together with the annual statement ofaccounts and auditor’s report thereon to be laid on the Tables of
the House of Representatives and of the Senate and annual statements
of such accounts and auditor’s report shall be published in theGazette.
16.  The income of the Commission shall be exempt from income
tax.Annual
reports and
estimates.
Exemption
from income
tax.Keeping of
accounts and
records.Funds and
resources of
the
Commission.10 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
17.—(1)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), the Minister
may, by order—
(a) regulate the distribution, purchase or sale of goods or any
class or description of goods;
(b) provide for the recall of certain goods and services which
are dangerous or hazardous to safety and the refund orremission by the provider of the purchase price paid;
(c) provide for the furnishing by persons carrying on or
employed in connection with any trade or business ofinformation concerning all or any of the elements of thecontents of goods, or the cost or the sale price of goodsor any class or description of goods bought or soldwhether by wholesale or retail in such trade or business;or
(d) require the provision and maintenance, at places at which
goods are offered for sale by retail, of means wherebypersons wishing to purchase any of those goods mayascertain the weight or measurement thereof.
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1)
(d), the Minister may, by order, require—
(a) that the prices of those goods shall be marked on the
goods or on any container in or from which they are sold;and
(b) that persons shall not be obstructed in any attempt to
ascertain at the place at which they wish to purchase anyof those goods, the weight or measurement thereof.
(3)  Nothing in subsection (1) or (2) shall be deemed to
authorize the Minister to make any order under that subsectionregulating the exportation, distribution, purchase, sale or price of anygoods the exportation, distribution, purchase, sale or price (as thecase may be) of which is, or may be, regulated under or by virtueof the provisions of any Act.Minister to
make orders.11 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
PART IV .  Duties of Providers and Consumers
18.—(1) At any time before payment is made for any goods
(whether sold as new or used) a provider shall, in addition to therequirements of any other enactment relating to the packaging,
labelling or description of goods, provide to the consumer, verbally
or in writing in the English language, all information concerning thegoods being sold.
(2)  The information referred to in subsection (1) is—
(a) where applicable, the origin, price in the currency of
Jamaica, care, terms, components, proper use, weight, size,
instructions for assembly and installation of the goods; and
(b) where chargeable, the professional fees of the provider in
respect of the goods.
(3)  Where a provider refuses or fails to comply with
subsection (1) he shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary inthe warranty document, be responsible for any damage done to the
goods by the consumer that can be directly attributed to the
consumer’s lack of information.
(4)  A provider who contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a Resident
Magistrate to a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand dollars.
19.—(1)  A consumer shall at all times be entitled to check the
weight, volume or other measurement of any goods that he may be
purchasing where the weight, volume or other measurement of thegood materially affects or determines the price thereof.
(2)  For the purposes of subsection (1), any provider of
any good that is sold by reference to its weight, volume or othermeasurement shall provide appropriate measurement standards in
accordance with the Weights and Measures Act for use by the
consumer at the time of purchase.
(3)  A provider commits an offence if in selling or purporting
to sell any goods by weight or other measurement or by number, he
delivers or causes to be delivered to the consumer, a lesser quantitythan that purported to be supplied or that corresponds with the price
charged.Measurementof goods.Information
to consumer.12 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
(4)  A provider who contravenes this section commits an
offence and is liable on summary conviction before a Resident
Magistrate to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars.
20.—(1)  Where a consumer purchases goods or services from
a provider, the provider shall give to the consumer a receipt
showing—
(a) the amount paid by the consumer;
(b) the date on which the purchase is made;
(c) a description of the goods or services sold;(d) where applicable, the professional fee charged; and
(e) such other information as may be prescribed.
(2)  At any time subsequent to the purchase, the receipt
issued by the provider shall be adequate proof of the purchase of
the goods or services and may be used for the purposes of refund
in any of the circumstances specified in this Act.
(3)  A provider who contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a Resident
Magistrate to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand dollars or toimprisonment for a term of thirty days or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
21.—(1)  Subject to the standard provisions of warranties, a
provider shall issue explicit warranties in relation to his goods or
services, as the case may be, whether the goods are new or used,
and whether the service offered is the repair of any appliance,furniture, equipment or other good.
(2)  Any warranty given by the manufacturer (whether local
or foreign) and attached to any goods or services sold or provided,as the case may be, in Jamaica shall be deemed to extend to the
provider in Jamaica who shall be liable to the consumer in relation
to such warranty.
(3)  Where a provider is liable only for the free replacement
of parts under a warranty agreement, the provider shall not require
the consumer to use the services of the provider in effecting therepairs to the equipment.Warranties.Receipt to be
given toconsumer.13 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
(4)  Implied warranties in the absence of explicit warranties
shall apply to the sale of all used goods and to the repair of all goods.
(5)  Where the service provided is the repair or replacement
of a defective good, there shall be an implied warranty that the repairor any replacement of the good shall be carried out within areasonable time, and the implied warranties applicable to the contractfor sale of goods shall apply in relation to repaired or replacementgoods.
(6) In the absence of an explicit warranty which shall be at
the discretion of the provider, an implied warranty of six months onparts and labour shall, subject to the standard conditions ofwarranties, attach to the transaction.
22.—(1)  Subsection (2) applies in any case where a provider—
(a) undertakes to provide a consumer with a good or service
upon payment of a fee therefor;
(b) provides the declared benefit attached to the service or
use of the good; and
(c) inadvertently causes bodily injury or pecuniary loss to be
sustained by the consumer, independent of all other causesor contributory negligence.
(2)  The provider shall, upon presentation by the consumer
of a complaint, accompanied by a document from the Commissionsubstantiating that, in its opinion, and after consultation with theprovider, the complaint is valid and well founded—
(a) undertake to pay the consumer all reasonable costs
incurred or to be incurred by the consumer in correcting
the damage so caused; and
(b) initiate payment of compensation within such period, not
exceeding seven days after the complaint is received atthe registered, regional or local offices of the provider,
provided that where a provider is unable to initiate such payment
within the period of seven days aforementioned, he may apply to
the Commission seeking leave to extend the period within which the
payment may be made.Damage
resulting
from use ofservice or
goods.14 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
(3)  A provider shall not be relieved of liability if—
(a) the consumer fails to avail himself of some other good or
service that may be recommended by the provider of theprimary good or service as a supplementary or
complementary good or service; or
(b) he has provided complementary goods or services which
fail to function well or cause damage or other loss.
(4) A provider who contravenes subsection (2) or (3)
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction before aResident Magistrate to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand
dollars.
23.—(1)  Where—
(a) any good sold to a consumer fails to provide to the
consumer the benefit and uninterrupted enjoyment forwhich it was intended; and
(b) the failure is determined by the Commission, after
consultation with the provider, not to be due to apparent
negligence or abuse by the consumer within thecomprehensive warranty period,
then the relevant provider shall be responsible for its replacement
or repair at no cost to the consumer.
(2)  The provider shall, in the event of repair of the good
referred to in subsection (1)—
(a) return the good to the consumer in a fully repaired and
functional state within such period, after receipt of the goodfor replacement or repair, as the Commission, afterconsultation with the provider, considers to be appropriate.
(b) if the good is not returned to the consumer within the
period determined by the Commission, provide the
consumer with a temporary substitute of comparative valuefor the consumer's uninterrupted use and enjoyment untilsuch time as the consumer's good is replaced or repairedand returned.Damaged
goods sold to
consumer.15 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
(3)   A provider who co ntravenes subse ction (2) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a Resident
Magistrate to a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand dollars.
24.—(1)  Subject to subsections (3) and (4), where a consumer
is encouraged to acquire goods by the provider’s declaration and
description of the goods and the consumer subsequently discovers
that those goods are defective or different in a material particularfrom those declared or described, the consumer may return the goods
to the provider.
(2)  The provider shall immediately offer to the consumer,
in exchange for the returned goods, monetary compensation to the
value of the goods or such other amount as may be agreed between
the consumer and provider.
(3)  Refunds on goods returned to a provider pursuant to
subsection (1) shall only be made where the goods are returned to
the provider—
(a) in the condition in which they were purchased; or
(b) with minimal damage resulting from reasonable exposure
in the normal course of the consumer's use of the goodsprior to discovery of the material difference between the
goods received and the goods that the consumer
requested;
(c) where there is a dispute as to the condition of the goods
the Commission may, upon request, examine the goods
with a view to making a determination as to the conditionof the goods.
(4)   A consumer who acquires a good that in every way
is similar or identical to the one requested or described and declaredby the provider shall not be entitled to a refund if, having left the
place from which the provider sold the good, the consumer for any
reason decides that he no longer wants it.
(5)  A provider who contravenes subsection (2) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a Resident
Magistrate to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars.Return of
defectivegoods.16 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
25.—(1) Subsection (2) shall apply in any case where—
(a) a consumer purchases any electrical good, believing it to
be fully functional and operational; and
(b) upon attempting to use it, the consumer discovers that it
is faulty or non-functional.
(2)  The consumer shall, upon returning the good to the
provider, be entitled to—
(a) an exchange of the faulty good for a new functional similar
good free of cost; or
(b) a refund of the amount paid for the good if the provider
is unable to establish that the good was damaged as adirect result of the consumer’s actions.
26.—(1) A provider shall only provide such services as are
approved by the consumer and shall not require a consumer to signan open ended commitment to pay for services which, in additionto those contracted, may, in the provider’s opinion, be necessary orappropriate.
(2)  A provider who offers a repair service shall—
(a) disclose to the consumer any and all additional related
repairs that he deems necessary for the consumer to enjoyreasonably long and uninterrupted use of the repaired good;and
(b) obtain a written indemnity from the consumer if the
consumer chooses not to require the provider to effect therecommended repairs.
(3) A provider who contravenes this section commits an
offence and is liable on summary conviction before a ResidentMagistrate to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars.
27.—(1) Businesses which offer repair services to consumers shall
keep records stating—
(a) the name, address and telephone number of the consumer;
Businesses
offering
repair
services.Return of
electrical
goods.
Approved
and non-approved
services.17 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
(b) a reasonably accurate description of the good to be
repaired, including any identification number or mark;
(c) the replacement value of the good in its present state as
agreed with the consumer;
(d) an estimate of the labour and other costs to be paid by
the consumer in respect of the repairs to be effected;
(e) the date on which the good was received for repair; and(f) the date on which the good will be ready for delivery,
and a copy of such information shall be given to the consumer before
the repairs are commenced.
(2) A business which contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a ResidentMagistrate to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars.
PART V.  Misleading and Deceptive Conduct, False
Representations and Unfair Practices
28.—(1)  No person shall, in the course of trade or business,
engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely tomislead or deceive.
(2)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a ResidentMagistrate to a fine not exceeding one million dollars or imprisonmentfor a term not exceeding one year or to both such fine andimprisonment.
29.—(1) No person shall, in the course of trade or business,
engage in conduct that is likely to mislead the public as to the nature,manufacturing process, characteristics, suitability for a purpose orquantity of goods or services, as the case may be.
(2)  Any person who contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a ResidentMagistrate to a fine not exceeding one million dollars or imprisonmentfor a term not exceeding one year or to both such fine andimprisonment.Misleading or
deceptiveconduct.
Misleading
public as to
the nature,etc.,
of goods or
services.18 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
30.—(1)  No person shall, in the course of trade or business, in
connection with the supply or possible supply of goods or services
or with the promotion by any means of the supply or use of goods
or services—
(a) falsely represent that—
(i) the goods or services are of a particular kind,
standard, quality, grade, quantity, composition,style, or model, or have had a particular history
or particular previous use;
(ii) services are of a p articular kind, standard,
quality, or quantity, or that they are supplied by
any particular person or by any person of a
particular trade or business, qualification, orskill;
(iii) a particular person has agreed to acquire goods
or services;
(iv) goods are new, reconditioned, or that they were
manufactured, produced, processed, or
reconditioned at a particular time;
(v) goods or services have any sponsorship,
approval, endorsement, performance
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits; or
(vi) a person has any sponsorship, approval,
endorsement, or affiliation;
(b) make a false or misleading representation—
(i) with respect to the price of any goods or
services;
(ii) concerning the need for any goods or services;
(iii) concerning the existence, exclusion, or effect of
a condition, warranty, guarantee, right or
remedy; or
(iv) concerning the place of origin of goods.False or
misleadingrepresentation.19 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
(2)   Any person who contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine notexceeding one million dollars or imprisonment for a term notexceeding one year or to both such fine and imprisonment.
31.—(1)  Where it can be proven that a provider—
(a) has contracted to provide goods or services;(b) pursuant to that contract, has received a deposit in cash
or kind; and
(c) on the contracted delivery date, has failed without
reasonable cause to deliver such goods or services ordemonstrate that such goods or services are in areasonably advanced state of production,
that provider shall be deemed to have acted in a fraudulent manner
and is liable to be prosecuted in relation thereto.
(2)   A provider who is convicted of an offence under
subsection (1) is liable to a fine not exceeding two million dollars orimprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to both suchfine and imprisonment.
32.—(1)  No person shall in the course of trade or business,
advertise for supply at a specified price, goods or services which—
(a) he does not intend to offer for supply; or(b) he does not have reasonable grounds for believing can be
supplied by him at that price for a period that is, and inquantities that are, reasonable having regard to the natureof the market in which he carries on business and thenature of the advertisement.
(2)  Any person who has advertised goods or services for
supply at a specified price shall offer such goods or services forsupply at that price for a period that is, and in quantities that are,reasonable having regard to the nature of the market in which hecarries on business and the nature of the advertisement.
(3) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a ResidentAdvertising.Non-delivery
of goods orservices on
contracted
date.20 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
Magistrate to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty days.
33.—(1)  An advertised delivery date for new, used or repaired
goods shall form part of the contractual agreement between theprovider and the consumer.
(2)  Where a provider fails without reasonable cause to
meet the advertised delivery date the provider shall refund to theconsumer all moneys paid, plus interest on any amount not refunded,as respects the period beginning with the date of deposit of theamount and ending on the date of its refund, at an annual rate tenpercentage points above the Treasury Bill rate applicable at theformer date.
(3)  Any provider who has advertised a completion or
delivery date, and has obtained from the consumer a deposit in cashor kind or both, against the provision of the goods or service, mayelect to terminate the contract within seven days after the receipt ofthe deposit and in such case, shall refund the full value of the deposit.
34.—(1) No person shall demand or accept payment or other
consideration for goods or services, if at the time of the demand oracceptance, that person—
(a) does not intend to supply the goods or services;(b) intends to supply goods or services which are materially
different from the goods or services in respect of whichthe payment or other consideration is demanded oraccepted; or
(c) does not have reasonable grounds to believe that the goods
or services will be supplied within any specified period,or if no period is specified, within a reasonable time.
(2)   Any person who contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a ResidentMagistrate to a fine not exceeding two million dollars or imprisonmentfor a term not exceeding two years or to both such fine andimprisonment.Advertised
delivery date.
Conditions of
demanding
and accepting
payment, etc.21 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
35.  Upon the conviction of a provider of an offence the Court
may order that provider—
(a) to make to the consumer, restitution of any deposit made
by the consumer;
(b) to pay to the consumer a sum representing the costs
incurred by that consumer as a result of the offence; and
(c) to pay to the Commission such sum as represents the costs
incurred in relation to the prosecution of the offence.
PART VI.  Unfair Contracts
36.  In relation to any breach of duty or obligation, it is immaterial
for any purpose of this Part whether the breach was inadvertent orintentional, or whether liability for it arises directly or vicariously.
37.—(1)  A person shall not by reference to—
(a) any term of a contract;(b) a notice given to persons generally; or(c) particular persons,
exclude or restrict his liability for death or personal injury resulting
from negligence.
(2)  In the case of other loss or damage, a person shall
not so exclude or restrict his liability for negligence except in so faras the term or notice satisfies the requirement of reasonableness asprovided for in section 43.
(3)  Where a term of a contract or notice purports to
exclude or restrict liability for negligence, other than in cases resultingin death or personal injury, the fact that a person agrees with it or isaware of it is not of itself to be taken as indicating his voluntary
acceptance of any risk, however the term or notice shall have effect
where the Commission determines that it satisfies the requirement ofreasonableness as provided for in section 43.
38.  No party to a contract shall—
(a) when he is in breach of contract, exclude or restrict his
liability in respect of the breach; orCourt may
order
payment of
damages orcosts.
Breach of
duty or
obligation.
Excluding or
restricting
liability by
contract.
Reliance
uponcontractual
provisions
where breach.22 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
(b) claim to be entitled to render—
(i) a contractual performance substantially different
from that which was reasonably expected of
him; or
(ii) any performance in respect of the whole or any
part of his contractual obligation,
except in so far as the contract term satisfies the
requirement of reasonableness.
39.  A consumer shall not by reference to any term of a contract
be made to indemnify another person (whether a party to the contract
or not) in respect of liability that may be incurred by the other personfor negligence or breach of contract, except in so far as the term ofthe contract satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
40.—(1)  In the case of goods of a type ordinarily supplied for
private use or consumption, where loss or damage—
(a) arises from the goods proving defective while in consumer
use; and
(b) results from the negligence of a person concerned in the
manufacture or distribution of the goods,
liability for the loss or damage shall not be excluded or restricted
by reference to any contract term or notice contained in or operating
by reference to a guarantee of the goods except in so far as theCommission determines that the term or notice satisfies the
requirement of reasonableness as provided for in section 43.
(2) For the purposes of this section—
(a) goods are to be regarded as “in consumer use” when a
person is using them, or is in  possession of them for use,
otherwise than exclusively for the purposes of a business;
and
(b) anything in writing is a guarantee if it contains or purports
to contain some promise or assurance (however wordedor presented) that defects will be made good by completeor partial replacement, or by repair, monetarycompensation or otherwise.Indemnity
subject toreasonableness.
Loss or
damage fromdefective
goods or
negligence ofmanufacturer.23 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
41.  Liability for breach of the obligations arising from the following
sections of the Sale of Goods and Hire Purchase Acts shall not be
excluded or restricted by reference to any contract term—
(a) sections 13 and 15 of the Sale of Goods Act, in
particular—
(i) an implied condition on the part of the provider
that in the case of a sale he has a right to sell
the goods, and that in the case of an agreement
to sell he will have a right to sell the goods atthe time when the property is to pass;
(ii) an implied warranty that the consumer shall have
and enjoy quiet possession of the goods;
(iii) an implied warranty that the goods shall be free
from any charge or incumbrance in favour of
any third party, not declared or known to theconsumer before or at the time when the
contract is made; and
(iv) implied conditions as to quality or fitness; and
(b) sections 9 and 11 of the Hire Purchase Act, in particular—
(i) implied conditions and warranties; and
(ii) f urther implied conditions in special cases.
42.—(1)  Where, for the purpose of reliance upon it, a contract
term has to satisfy the requirement of reasonableness, it may be found
to do so and be given effect accordingly notwithstanding that thecontract has been terminated either by breach or by a party electing
to treat it as repudiated.
(2)  Where on a breach the contract is nevertheless affirmed
by a party entitled to treat it as repudiated, such affirmation does
not of itself exclude the requirement of reasonableness in relation to
any term of a contract.
43.—(1)  For the purposes of this Part and section 46 the
requirement of reasonableness in relation to a contract term, is that
the term is a fair and reasonable one to be included having regardto the circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been,Satisfying
reasonableness
where
contractterminated.
Reasonableness.Effect of Sale
of Goods andHire Purchase
Acts.24 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
known to or in the contemplation of the parties when the contract
was made.
(2) The requirement of reasonableness in this Act in relation
to a notice (not being a notice having contractual effect), is that thenotice should be fair and reasonable to allow reliance on it,  havingregard to all the circumstances obtaining when the liability arose or(but for the notice) would have arisen.
(3) It is for those claiming that a contract term or notice
satisfies the requirement of reasonableness to show that it does.
44. The parties may attempt to settle their disagreements through
mediation by the Commission before taking the matter to court.
P
ART VII.  Miscellaneous
45.—(1)  This section applies to any case where a provider
contracts to provide a consumer with a good or service over anextended period of time, and that provider contracts to receiveperiodic payments from the consumer for the good or service.
(2) The provider, as the case may be, shall—
(a) be required to present  an accurate claim for the exact
amount of, or the exact percentage of, the total value ofthe good or service actually received to date by theconsumer; and
(b) upon presentation of such accurate claim, be entitled to
void the contract if payment in full is not made within areasonable time after the presentation of the claim, or bya pre-determined payment date which forms part of thecontract.
(3)  In the event that the provider is unable to present an
accurate claim as mentioned in subsection (2), the provider, as thecase may be, may act in accordance with subsection (4).
(4)  The provider may—
(a) present the consumer with an estimated claim; andAlternative
disputeresolution.
Goods or
services
acquired byinstallment.25 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
(b) if the estimated claim is reasonably accurate, request that
the consumer pays the estimated amount on the conditions
specified in subsection (5).
(5)  The conditions referred to in subsection (4) are that—
(a) where the amount estimated is greater than the accurate
claim, the amount paid by the consumer will be creditedto the amount owing at the next time that an accurate claim
is presented; and
(b) the provider shall under no circumstances, be able to void
the contract or impose any penalty therein contained in the
event of breach by the consumer, solely on the ground that
the estimated amount has not been paid by the consumer,either in full or in part.
(6)  Any provider who presents an estimated claim for any
good or service shall be required to present an accurate claim nolater than 90 days after presentation of the estimate.
(7)  Subsection (6) shall apply notwithstanding that the
consumer of the good or service does not pay the estimated amountclaimed or pays it in full or in part.
46.—(1)  Where a service is to be provided to a consumer—
(a) the provider is deemed to be providing the consumer with
a benefit under the relevant contract; and
(b) the provisions of subsection (2) shall apply where a fee is
collected from the consumer for that service.
(2)  The provider shall—
(a)  be liable to—
(i) make a full refund to the consumer; and(ii) further compensate the consumer for all
expenses reasonably incurred by the consumer
as a result of contracting the provider to providethe benefit,
if for reasons not attributable to the consumer, the benefit
is not received by the consumer; orApportionment
of paymentswhere service
not received.26 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
(b) where the benefit is received only in part—
(i) refund a proportionate part of the fees
collected; or
(ii) subject to subsection (3), be entitled to receive
a similar proportionate part of the fees if not yet
paid.
(3)  Subsection (2) shall not apply in any case where the
consumer contracts to pay the provider the prescribed fee regardless
of  whether the consumer receives the benefit.
(4)  The provider who offers a service to the consumer
shall—
(a) be required to stipulate the extent of the benefit that shall
be deemed to be attached to the service; and
(b) provide the consumer with an appropriate warranty that—
(i) the benefit shall be enjoyed for a reasonable
time, subject to the fulfillment of such conditions
attached by the provider as may be reasonable
to the consumer’s enjoyment of that benefit; and
(ii) in the absence of the enjoyment of the benefit,
the provider shall again provide the service free
of cost to the consumer, however theperformance of the warranty is subject to the
Commission's determination as to the provision
of or absence of the benefit.
(5)  A provider who contravenes subsection (2) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction before a Resident
Magistrate to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars andin default of payment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six
months.
47.—(1)  A provider commits an offence if, in the event of default
in repayment of a loan he acts on the powers contained in a Bill of
Sale of chattels pledged by a consumer he employs any person other
than a Bailiff to recover any or all of the chattels pledged in the Billof Sale to the provider.Purporting to
act on a Bill
of Sale.27 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
(2)  A provider who commits an offence under subsection
(1) shall, upon  summary conviction before a Resident Magistratebe liable to a fine not exceeding one million dollars and in default ofpayment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.
(3)  The court may order a provider convicted of an offence
to compensate the consumer for all expenses reasonably incurred as
a result of the breach and the legal action.
(4)  A provider commits an offence if, in taking action to
recover any or all of the chattels pledged by the consumer in theBill of Sale to the provider in the event of default in repayment of aloan, the provider carries out an act of seizure although the consumer’sindebtedness to the provider has already been discharged or is
currently being serviced in accordance with existing contractual
provisions.
(5)  A provider who commits an offence under subsection
(4) shall, upon summary conviction before a Resident Magistrate, beliable to a fine not exceeding one million dollars and in default ofpayment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.
(6)  The court may order a provider convicted of an offence
under subsection (4) to pay to the consumer an amount equal totwo times the market value of the chattels seized plus an amount often thousand dollars per day for every day that the consumer hasbeen deprived of the use and enjoyment of those chattels.
(7)  Any person who—
(a) not being a Bailiff, purports to be a Bailiff; or
(b) being a Bailiff,
wrongfully seizes the chattels of a consumer shall, notwithstanding
any other charge that may be brought against him, be guilty of anoffence under this Act.
(8)   A person who commits an offence under subsection
(6) shall, upon summary conviction before a Resident Magistrate be
liable to a fine not exceeding one million dollars and in default ofpayment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.28 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
(9)   The Court may order a person convicted of an offence
under subsection (8) to pay to the consumer an amount equal totwo times the market value of the chattels seized plus an amount of
ten thousand dollars per day for every day that the consumer has
been deprived of the use and enjoyment of those chattels.
(10)  Any Bailiff or person purporting to be a Bailiff who—
(a) threatens to seize the chattels of a consumer under the
powers contained in a Bill of Sale although the consumer’sindebtedness to the provider has already been discharged;
or
(b) recklessly damages the chattels of a consumer while
exercising distraint,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall, upon summary conviction before
a Resident Magistrate, be liable to a fine not exceeding one milliondollars and in default of payment to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year.
48.—(1)  Subject to subsection (3), all providers acting individually
or collectively, and offering goods or services to consumers for
purchase, shall be appropriately registered as companies, partnerships,
co-operatives, sole proprietorships or informal commercial operators.
(2)  The instruments of registration and licence where
applicable, or any official number or identification mark issued by
the relevant authorities shall be conspicuously displayed by theprovider for viewing by the consumer.
(3)  A provider who fails to comply with the provisions of
this section commits an offence, and shall upon summary convictionbefore a Resident Magistrate, be liable—
(a) in the case of an offence under subsection (1), to a
fine not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars or imprisonment fora term not exceeding three months; and
(b) in the case of an offence under subsection (2) to a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand dollars or imprisonment for a termnot exceeding thirty days.Registration
of providers.29 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
49.  The Minister may, by order, subject to affirmative resolution,
amend the monetary penalties specified in this Act.
50.  The Minister may make regulations, subject to affirmative
resolution, for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of thisAct.
51.  All real and personal property belonging to the Prices
Commission, including all moneys standing to the credit of orreceivable by that Commission shall, on a day to be appointed bythe Minister by Order published in the Gazette , without any
conveyance, assignment or other transfer, belong to and be vestedMinister may
amend
monetary
penalties.
Regulations.
Vesting of
property.30 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
in the Consumer Affairs Commission.
FIRST SCHEDULE (Section 4)
1.  The Commission shall consist of such number of members,
not being less than seven nor more than fifteen, as the Ministermay from time to time determine.
2.—(1)  The members of the Commission shall be appointed
by the Minister by instrument in writing and, subject to theprovisions of this Schedule, shall hold office for a period notexceeding three years, and shall be eligible for reappointment.
(2)  The Minister shall appoint one of the members of
the Commission to be the chairman and another to be deputychairman thereof.
3.  If the chairman or any other member of the Commission
is absent or unable to act, the Minister may appoint any personto act temporarily in the place of the Chairman or such member.
4.—(1)  Any member of the Commission, other than the
chairman, may at any time resign his office by instrument inwriting addressed to the Minister and transmitted through thechairman, and from the date of the receipt by the Minister ofsuch instrument, such member shall cease to be a member ofthe Commission.
(2)  The chairman may at any time resign his office by
instrument in writing addressed to the Minister and suchresignation shall take effect as from the date of the receipt bythe Minister of such instrument.
5.  The Minister may at any time revoke the appointment of
any member of the Commission.
6.  The names of all members of the Commission as first
constituted and every change in the membership thereof, shallbe published in the Gazette.
7.—(1)  The Commission shall meet at such times as may be
necessary or expedient for the transaction of business, and suchmeetings shall be held at such places and times and on suchdays as the Commission may determine.
(2)  The chairman, or in his absence the deputy chairman,
shall preside at meetings of the Commission, and in the absenceof both the chairman and the deputy chairman from any meeting,Constitution.
Appointment
of members.
Acting
members.
Resignations.
Revocation.
Gazetting
names of
members.
Procedure for
meetings.31 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
the members present at that meeting shall elect one of their
number to preside thereat.
(3)  The quorum of the Commission shall be five,
including the chairman or other member presiding at themeeting.
(4)  The decisions of the Commission shall be by a
majority of votes and, in any case in which the voting is equal,the chairman or other member presiding at the meeting shallhave a casting vote in addition to an original vote.
(5)  Minutes  in proper  form  of  each meeting shall be
kept by the secretary and shall be confirmed by the chairmanor other member presiding as soon as practicable thereafter ata subsequent meeting.
(6)  The acts of the Commission shall be authenticated
by the signature of the chairman or the secretary of theCommission.
(7)  Subject to the provisions of this paragraph the
Commission shall have power to regulate its own proceedings.
(8)  The validity of any proceedings of the Commission
shall not be affected by any vacancy amongst the membersthereof or by any defect in the appointment of a member thereof.
8.—(1) The Commission may appoint and employ at such
remuneration and on such terms and conditions as it thinks fita secretary and such other officers, servants and agents as itthinks necessary for the proper performance of its functions:
Provided that no appointment to a post carrying a salary in
excess of the prescribed rate shall be made without the prior
approval of the Minister.
(2)  The prescribed rate means five hundred thousand
dollars or such higher rate as may be approved by Order ofthe Minister.
(3)  The Governor-General may, subject to such conditions
as he may impose, approve of the appointment of any publicofficer in the service of Jamaica to any office with theCommission and any public officer so appointed shall, in relationto pension, gratuity or other allowance, and to other rights asa public officer, be treated as continuing in the service of theGovernment.Officers and
servants.
Seal of the
Commission.32 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
9.—(1)  The seal of the Commission shall be kept in the
custody of the chairman or the secretary and shall be affixedto instruments pursuant to a resolution of the Commission inthe presence of the chairman, or any other member of the
Commission, and the secretary.
(2)  The seal of the Commission shall be authenticated
by the signatures of the chairman, or any other memberauthorized to act in that behalf, and the secretary.
(3)  All documents other than those required by law to
be under seal, made by, and all decisions of the Commissionmay be signified under the hand of the chairman, or any othermember authorized to act in that behalf, or the secretary.
10.—(1)  No member of the Commission shall be personally
liable for any act or default of the Commission done or omittedto be done in good faith in the course of the operations of the
Commission.
(2)  Where any member of the Commission is exempt from
liability by reason only of the provisions of sub-paragraph (1)the Commission shall be liable to the extent that it would be ifsuch member were a servant or agent of the Commission.
11.  A member of the Commission who is in any way
interested in a company or undertaking which is in anyproceedings before the Commission shall disclose to theCommission the fact and nature of his interest and shall nottake part in any deliberation or any decision of the Commissionrelating to such matter, and such a disclosure shall forthwithbe recorded in the records of the Commission.
12.  There shall be paid to the members of the Commission,
such remuneration, if any, whether by way of honorarium, salaryor fees, and such allowances as the Minister may determine.
13.  The office of chairman or member of the Commission
shall not be a public office for the purposes of Chapter V ofthe Constitution of Jamaica.
14. The expenses of the Commission, including theProtection of
members.
Disclosure of
interest.
Remuneration
of members.
Office of
chairman nota public
office.
Expenses of
theCommission.33 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
remuneration of the members and staff thereof, shall be defrayed out of the
funds of the Commission.
SECOND  SCHEDULE (Section 9)
Summons to Witness
To: (name of person summoned and his calling and address, if known)
You are hereby summoned to appear before the Consumer Affairs
Commission at (place)  upon the    day of                          at      o’clock
and to give evidence respecting (state the matter). (If the person summoned
is to produce any documents, add):
And you are required to bring with you (specify the papers, books,
records and documents required).
IF YOU FAIL TO APPEAR in response to this Summons, a warrant for
your arrest may be issued.
Passed in the House of Representatives this 28th day of September, 2004.
      M ICHAEL PEART
Speaker.
Passed in the Senate this 19th day of November, 2004 with twenty-five (25)
amendments.
SYRINGA  MARSHALL -BURNETT, C.D.
President.34 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
This printed impression has been carefully
compared by me with the Bill which haspassed the House of Representatives andSenate, and has been found by me to be a trueand correct printed copy of the said Bill.
         Clerk to the Houses of Parliament.On the 1st day of March, 2005 the House of Representatives agreed to the
amendments made by the Senate.
          M ICHAEL  PEART
Speaker .35 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]
This printed impression has been  carefully
compared by me with the authenticatedimpression of the foregoing Act, and has beenfound by me to be a true and correct printedcopy of the said Act.
       Clerk to the Houses of Parliament.On the 1st day of March, 2005 the House of Representatives agreed to the
amendments made by the Senate.
          M ICHAEL  PEART
Speaker .34 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 200536 [No.    ] The Consumer Protection Act, 2005
Given under the hand of (Chairman or other member of the Commission)
this       day of                       20    .
MEMORANDUM  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Currently the Consumer Affairs Commission operates pursuant to the Trade
Act and is limited in its function as an advocate of consumers.  Additionally,the Commission has found that in the interest of the consumer, it is necessaryto have comprehensive legislation—
(a) for the promotion and protection of consumer interests in relation
to the supply of goods and the provision of services; and
(b) in order to ensure the protection of the life, health and safety of
the consumer.
This Bill therefore seeks, inter alia , to—
(a) amalgamate aspects of our current law that deal with the sale,
purchase or provision of goods and services, respectively;
(b) establish the Consumer Affairs Commission with powers which
include conducting investigations into conduct of providers ofgoods or services, respectively, which is reported to have affectedor be affecting the rights of consumers;
(c) establish—
(i) additional rights for the protection of consumers; and
(ii) the duties of consumers and providers;
(d) improve redress received by a consumer whose rights have been
breached;
(e) create offences for misleading and deceptive conduct, false
representations, unfair and unsafe practices;
(f) ensure that the contracts made between consumers and providers
contain provisions that satisfy the test of reasonableness;
(g) provide for the registration of providers of goods or services to
consumers;
(h) provide redress for the Commission by the offender where the
Commission defends a matter in court; and
(i) enable providers and consumers to seek mediation services before
taking the matter to be settled by the court.
         Phillip  Paulwell
Minister of Commerce, Science and Technology.37 The Consumer Protection Act, 2005 [No.    ]A BILL
ENTITLED
AN ACT to Provide for the promotion and
protection of consumer interests, in relationto the supply of goods and the provisionof services in order to ensure protection oflife, health and safety of consumers andothers, the establishment of a ConsumerAffairs Commission and for connected
purposes.
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
As passed in the Honourable House of Representatives.
 ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
As passed in the Honourable Senate.
 ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
__________________________________________
PRINTED BY JAMAICA PRINTING SERVICES (1992) LTD.,
(GOVERNMENT PRINTERS), DUKE STREET, KINGSTON, JAMAICA.
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) 
ACT, 2002 
No. 62 OF 2002 
[17th December, 2002.1 
An Act further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 3 
1. (1) This Act may betalled the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002. Short title and 
commence- 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification ment. 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
68 of 1986. 2. In the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), Amendment of . in seation 2, in sub-section (I),- section 2. 
(a) in clause (b), after sub-clause (iv), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, 
name1 y :- .I ' 
"(v) in case of death of a consumer, his legal heir or representative;"; 
(b) in clause (c),.- 
(i) in sub-clause (i), for the-words "any trader", the words "any trader or 
service provider" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-clauses (iv) and (v), the following sub-clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
, "(iv) a trader or the service provider, as the case may be, hascharged for 
the goods or for the services mentioned ig the complaint, a price in excess of 
the plice- 
(a) fixed by or under aqy law'for the Jime being in force; 
9 
I (b') displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods; 
(c) displayed on the price list exhibited by him by or under any law 
for the time being in force; 
(d) agreed between the parties; ,.;Consumer Protection (Amendmenr) [ACT 62 
(v) goods Ghich will be hazardous to life and safety when used are being 
offered for sale to the public,- 
(a) in contravention of an3 standards relating to safety of such goods 
as required to be complied with,by or under any law for the time being in 
force; 
(b) if the trader could have known with due diligence that the goods 
so offered are unsafe to the public; 
(vi) services which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to life and 
safety of the public when used, are being offered by the service provider which 
such person could have known with due diligence to be injurious to life and safety;"; 
(c) in clause (4,- 
(i) in sub-clause (ii), the following words shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:- 
"but does not include a person who avails of such services for any 
commercial purpose"; 
(ii)'for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, 
nameEy:- 
8 'Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, "commercial 
purpose" does not include use by a person of goods bought and used by 
him and services avaiM by,W exclusively for the purposes of earning 
his livelihood by means of self-employment;'; 
(6) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
'(i) "manufacturer" means a person wh- 
(i) makes or manufactures any goods or parts thereof; or 
I I 
(ii) does not make or manufacture any goods but assembles parts 
thereof made or manufactured by others; or 
(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any goods made or 
manufactured by any other manufacturer;'; 
: (e) for clause (nn), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- 
'(nn) "regulation" means the regulations made by the National 
Commission under this Act; 
1 
I (nnn) "restrictive trade practice" means a trade practice which tends to 
I 
! *bring about manipulation of price or its conditions of delivery or to affect flow 
of supplies in the market rekiting to goods or services in such a manner as to 
I , impose on the consumers unjustified costs or restrictions and shall include- 
(a) delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader in supply of such 
I goods or in providing the services which has led or is likely to lead to rise 
in the price; 
(b) any trade practice which requires a consumer to buy, hire or I avail of any goods or, as the case may be, services as condition precedent 
i to buying, hiring or availing of other goods or services;'; 
, , . 
OF 20021 Consumer Protection (~mendment) 
(JJ in clause (0). for the words "users and includes the provision of ', the words 
"users and includes, but not limited to, the provision of' shall be substituted; 
(g) after clause (0). the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- I 
'(00) "spurious goods and services" mean such goods and services which 
are claimed to be genuine but they are actually not so;'; 
(h) in clause (r),- 
(i) after sub-clause (31, the following sub-clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
"(3A) withholding from the participants of any scheme offering 
gifts, prizes or other items free of charge, on its closure the information 
about final results of the scheme. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-clause, the participants 
of a scheme shall be deemed to have been informed of the final results of 
the scheme where such results are within a reasonable time published. 
prominently in the same newspapers in which the scheme was origi"ally 
advertised;"; 
(ii) after sub-clause (5). the following sub-clause shall be .inserted, 
namely:- 
"(6) manufacture of spurious goods or offering such goods for sale 
or adopting deceptive practices in the provision of services.". 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (I), for the words ''The Central Amendment of 
Government may", the words "The Central Government shall" shall be substituted. section 4. 
4. In section 7 of the principal Act,- Amendment of 
section 7. 
(a) in sub-section (I), in the opening portion, for the words "The State 
Government may", the words 'The State Government shall" shall be substituted; 
(6) in sub-sectidn (2), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
"(c) such number of other official or non-official members, not exceeding 
ten, as may be nominated by the Central ~overnmknt.". 
9. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, ~nsertionof 
namely:- new sections 
8A and 88. 
"8A. (1)The State Government shall establish for every district, by notification, The District 
a council to be known as the District Consumer Protection Council with effect from C0wumer Pro- 
such date as it may specify in such notification. tection Coun- 
cil. 
Y: . - - (2) -pe ~istrict Consumer Prbtwtion' Council..(hereiriafPer referred to as the 
L)istrict:C~uncil) shall.consist of the following members;namely:- - - I 
... - . , 
(b) such number of other official and non-official members representing 
such interests as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
. Consumer Protection (Amendment) [ACT 62 
(3) The District Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two 
meetings shall be held every year. 
(4) The District Council shall meet at such time and place within the district as 
the Chairman may think fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction 
of its business as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
Objects of the 8B. The objects of every District Council shall be to promote and protect 
Ilistrict 
Council. within the district the rights of the consumers laid down in clauses (a) to (fl of 
section 6.". 
Amendment of 6. In section 10 of the principal Act,- 
>ection 10. 
(a) in sub-section (I), for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
"(b) two other members, one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have 
the following qualifications, namely:- 
(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age, 
(ii) possess a bachelor's degree from a recognised university, 
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate 
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems 
relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs 
or administration: 
Provided that a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member, 
if he- 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence 
which, in the opinion of the State ~overnment,involves mGa1 tuihitude; 
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 
or 
(d) has been reinoved or dismissed from the service of the 
Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by the Government; 
or 
(e) has, in the opinion of the State Government, such financial or 
1 other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of 
I 
I his functions as a member; or 
I . (fl has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the 
State Government;"; 
(b) in sub-section (IA), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
"Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason 
of absence or otherwise, unable to act as Chairman of the Selection Committee, 
the State Government may refer the matter to the Chief Justice of the High - 
Cdurt for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Courtdto act as Chairman."; 
I (c) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely :- 
I 
i 
I -- . " - - " < -7 - s . . -- " "-w - " , - -- " " "^-- ---"*- ". lr I " % "* -?, % v *d Consumer Protection (Amendment) 
,- 
"(2) Every member of the District Forum shall hold office for a term of 
five years or up to the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re-appointment for another 
term of five years or up to the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, 
subject to the condition that he fulfils the qualifications and other conditions 
for appointment mentioned in clause (6) of sub-section (I) and such re- 
appointment is also made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection 
Committee: 
Provided further that a member may resign his office in writing under his 
hand addressed to the State Government and on such resignation being accepted, 
his office shall become vacant and may be filled by appointment of a person 
possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub-sect~on (I) in relation to 
the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the provisions 
of sub-section (IA) in place of the person who has resigned: 
Provided also that a person appointed as the President or as a member, 
before the commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002, 
shall continue to hold such office as President or member, as the case may be, 
till the completion of his term."; 
(d) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
"Provided that the appointment of a member on whole-time basis shall be 
made by the State Government on the recommendation of the President of the 
State Commission taking into consideration such factors as may be prescribed 
including the work load of the District Forum.". 
7. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (I), for the words "does not 
exceed rupees five lakhs", the words "does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs" shall be 
substituted. 
8. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely :- 
'12. (I) A complaint in relation to any goods sold or delivered or agreed to be 
sold or delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided may be filed with 
a Dismct Forum by- 
(a) the consumer to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to 
be sold or delivered or such service provided or agreed to be provided; 
(b) any recognised consumer association whether the consumer to whom 
the goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or service provided 
or agreed to be provided is a member of such association or not; 
(c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having 
the same interest, with the permission of the District Forum, on behalf of, or for 
the benefit of, ail consumers so interested; or 
(4 the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
either in its individual capacity or as a representative of interests of the 
consumers in general. 
(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (I) shall be accompanied with such 
amount of fee and payable in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) On receipt of a complaint made under sub-section (I), the District Forum 
may, by order, allow the complaint to be proceeded with or rejected: 
Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected under this sub-section unless an 
opportunity of being heard has been given to the complainant: 
Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be de- 
cided within twenty-one days from the date on which the complaint was received. 
(4) Where a complaint is allowed to be proceeded with under sub-section (3), the 
.Disqict Forum may proceed with the complaint in the manner provided under this Act: 
Provided that where a complaint has been admitted by the District Forum, it 
shall not be transferred to any other court or tribunal or any authority set up by or 
under any other law for the time being in force. Amendment of 
section 11. 
Substitution of 
new section 
for section 12. 
Manner in 
which. com- 
plaint shall be 
mode. 410 Consumer Protection (Amendment) [ACT 62 
Exphation.-For the purposes of this section, "recognised consumer asso- 
ciation" means any voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force.'. 1 of 1956. 
Amendment 9. In section 13 of the principal Act,- 
of section 13. (a) in the marginal heading, forhe words "Procedure on receipt of complaint.", 
the words "Procedure on admission of complaint." shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (I),- 
(9 in the opening portion, for the words "on receipt of a complaint", the 
words "on admission of a complaint" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
"(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within twenty-one days 
from the date of its admissiop, to the opposite party mentioned in the 
complaint directing him to give his version of the case within a period of 
thirty days or such extended period-not exceeding fifteen days as may be 
granted by the District Forum;"; 
(c) in sub-section (2),- 
(i) in the opening portion, fd the *rds "complaint rkceived", the words 
"complaints admitted" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (6). in sub-clause (ii), for the words "on the basis of evi- 
dence", the words "ex parte on the basis of eviden*" shall be substituted; 
(iii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(c) where the complainant fails to appear on the date of hearing 
before the District Forum, the District Forum may either dismiss the com- 
plaint for default or decide it on ments."; 
(d) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(3A) Every complaint shall be heard as expeditiously as po&ible and 
endeavour shall be made to decide the complaint within a period of three months 
from the date of receipt of notice by opposite party where the complaint does 
not require analysis or testing of commodities and within five months, if it 
requires analysis or testing of commodities: 
Provided that no adjournment shall be odinarily granted by the District 
Forum unless sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adjourn- 
ment have been recorded in writing by the Forum: 
Provided further that the District Forum shall make such otders as to the 
I costs occasioned by the adjournment as may be provided in the regulations 
made under this Act: 
d 
Provided also that in the event of a complaint being disposed of after the I 
I period so specified, the District Forum shall mod in writing, the reasons for 
! (the same at the tiqe of diping of the said complaint. 
(3B) Where during the pendency of any proceeding before the District 
Forum, it appears to it necessary, it may pass such interim order as is just and 
proper in the facts and circumstances of the case."; 
(e) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(7) In theevent of death of a complainant who is a consumer or of the 
o posite party against whom the complaint has been Ned, the provisions of 
I & er XW of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1'908 shall s of 1908. 
I apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to the plaintiff 
a+ the defendant shall be construed as reference to a complainant or the oppo- 
I site party, as the case may be.". 
, OF 20021 Uonstrtner Pro~eclion (Amendment) 
10. In section 14 ol'the principal Act,- 
(a) in sub-section (I),- 
-- 
(i) in clausu (d), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
"Provided thnt the District Forum shall hnvc the power to grant 
punitive damages in such circumstances as it deems tit;"; Amendment of 
seellan 14. 
(ii) in clnuse (4)) for thc words "rcmove the dcfects", the words "remove 
th defects in goods" shall bc substituted; 
(iii) after clnuse (h), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(ha) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from 
olrtrinp services which ore hazardous in nature; 
(hi)) to pay such sum as may be delermined by it, if it is of the 
opinion that loss or injury has been suffered by a large number of con- 
sumers who are not identifiable conveniently: 
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be 
less than five per cent. of the value of such defective goods sold or ser- 
vices provided, as the case may be, to such consumers: 
Provided further thnt the amount so obtained shall be credited in 
favour of such person and utilized in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(Itc) to issue corrective advertisement to neutralize the effect of 
misleading advertisement at the cost of the opposite party responsible for 
issuing such misleading advertisement;"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substi- 
tuted, namely:- 
"Provided'that where a member, for any reason, is unable to conduct a 
proceeding till it is completed, the President and the other member shall con- 
tinue the proceeding from the stage at which it was last hcard by the previous 
member.", 
11. In section 15 of thc principal Act, after the proviso, the following proviso shall be Amendnlent 
inserted, namely:-- aT seetien 15, 
"Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount 
in terms of an order of the District Forum, shall be entertained by the State Commis- 
sion unless the appellant has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent, of that 
amount or twenty-five thousand rupees, whichever is less.". 
12. In section 16 of the principal Act,-- Amendment 
(a) in sub-section (I), for clause (6) and the proviso thereunder, the following " sS&Otl" 
clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
"(b) not less than two, and not more than such number of members, as 
inay be prescribed, and one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have tha 
following qualifications, namely:- 
(i) be not less tnun thirty-five years of age; 
(ii) possess a bachelor's degree from a reeognised university; and 
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate 
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems 
relaling to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public af- 
fairs or administration: 
Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members shall be from 
amongst persons having a judicial background, 412 Consumer Protection (Amendment) [ACT 62 
i . i! .. 
i Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, the expression "persons 
I having a judicial background" shall mean persons having knowledge and expe- 
rience for at least a period of ten years as a presiding officer at the district level 
a court or any tribunal at equivalent level: 
Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a 
member, if he- 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an 
offence which, in ~e opinion of the State Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or 
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
court; or 
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the 
Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by the 
Government; or 
I 
I (e) has, in the opinion of the State Government, such financial or 
/ other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of 
I his functions as a member; or 
(f) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the 
State Government."; 
(b) after sub-section (I), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
"(1A) Every appointment under sub-section (1) shall be made by the State 
Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of 
the following members, namely:- 
(i) President of the State Commission - Chairman; 
(ii) Secretary of the Law Department of the State - Member; 
(iii) Secretary incharge of the Department dealing 
with Consumer Affairs in the State - Member: 
Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason 
of absence or otherwise, unable to act as Chairman of the Selection Committee, 
the State Government may refer the matter to the Chief Justice of the High 
Court for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act as Chairman. 
(1B) (i) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the State Commission 
may be exercised by Benches thereof. 
(@A Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more mem- 
bers as the President may deem fit. 
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points 
shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, 
but If the members are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on 
which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall either hear 
the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points 
by one or more or the other members and such point or points shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority of the members who have heard the 
case, including those who first heard it."; 
(c) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- Consumer Protection (Amendment) 413 
"Provided that the appointment of a member on whole-time basis shall ..,. ,: , _j .,:..,: ... .: . . . 
be made by the State Government on the recommendation of the President. of ::,:? ;.i...-s ., . 
the State Commission taking into consideration such factors as may be pre- ,,;j; fi.. i 
scribed including the work load of the State Commission."; , - :I- % 
28, r 
(d) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
name1 y :- 
"(3) Every member of the State Commission shall hold office for a term I:,!..:3; . .. .; 
of ive years or up to the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier: ,.,!..:I:,:,i .bz-,. -. . 7 
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re-appointment for another 
tr :m of five years or up to the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier, ,: : .7.,..e .,,. r..i ,:. j 
subject to the condition that he fulfils the qualifications and other conditions for iiilii.;_l ._.l ,:~.*. . 
.;,:-: ,-- ?. appointment mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (I) and such re-appoint- ,. .!-::?:: . 
!i!;;j.;..i/ 
ment is made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Commi'ttee: 
Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the State Com- 
mission shall also be eligible for re-appointment in the manner provided in 
clause (a) of sub-section (I) of this section: 
Provided also that a member may resign his office in writing under his . , ,;::.;s:~.{ 
hand addressed to the State Government and on such resignation being ac- ,..., ..~ ..,: z,>;< , I. ," cepted, his office shall become vacant and may be filled by appointment of a .,.(.:.: , .:,..b.,, ! person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub-section (1) in re- 
lation to the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the 
provisions of sub-section (1A) in place of the person who has resigned. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), a person ap- 
pointed as the President or as a member, before the commencement of the Con- 
sumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002, shall continue to hold such office as 
President or member, as the case,may be, till the completion of his tern.". 
13. Section 17 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (I) and in sub- Amendment of 
section (I) as so renumbered,- section 17. 
(a) in clause (a), in sub-clause (&for the words "exceeds rupees five lakhs but 
does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs", the words "exceeds rupees twenty lakhs but 
does not exceed rupees one crore" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely :- 
s', 
"(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a State'Commission within the 
limits of whose jurisdiction,- 
(a) the opposite party or each of the oppdsite parties, where there 
are more than one, at the time of the institution of the complaint, actually 
and voluntarily resides or carries on business or has a branch office or 
personally works for gain; or 
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at 
the time of the institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily re- 
sides, or canies on business or has a branch office or personally works 
for gain, provided that in such case either the permission of the State 
Commission is given or the opposite parties who do not reside or carry on 
business or have a branch office or personally works for gain, as the case 
may be, acquiesce in such institution; or 
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.". 4 14 Consumer Prolection (Amendmenl) [ACT 62 
Insertion of 14. After section 17 af the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
IN\Y sectlons namely:- 
I7A and 170. 
I'ranstbt af "17A. On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the State 
L'HSCS, Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, transfer any complaint pending 
before the District Forum to another District Forum within the State if the interest of 
justice so requires. 
l~lsertlen of 
new sectian 
I OA. 
I lsnrlng of 
i~ppeal. 
Amendment of 
soctlsn 20. 170. The State Commission shall ordinarily function in the State Capital but 
may perform its functions at such other place as the State Government may, in con- 
sultation withthe State Commission, notify in the Official Gazette, from time to time.". 
15. Section 18A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
16. In section 19 of the principal Act, after the first proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
"Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount 
in terms of an order of the State Commission, shall be entertained by the National 
Commission unless the appellant has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per 
cent, of the amount or rupees thirty-five thousand, whichever is less.". 
67. After section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
" 19A. An appeal filed before the State Commission or the National Commis- 
sion shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to 
finally dispose of the'appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its 
admission: 
Provided that no adjournment shall be ordinarily granted by the State Commis- 
sion or the National Commission, as the case may be, unless suflicient cause is shown 
and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by such Com- 
mission: 
Provided further that the State Commission or the National Commission, as the 
case may be, shall make such orders ns lo the costs occasioned by the adjournment as 
may be provided in the regulations made under this Act: 
Provided also that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period so 
specified, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, 
shall record in writing the reasons for the same at the time of disposing of the said 
appeal."a 
18. In section 20 of the principal Act,-- 
(a) in sub-section (I), for clause (b) and the proviso, the following clause shall 
be substituted, namely:-- 
'(b) not less than four, and not more than such number of members, as 
may be prescribed, and one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the 
following qualifications, namely:-- 
(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age; 
(ii) possess a bachelot's degree from a recognised university; and 
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing and have adequate 
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems 
relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public af- 
fairs ar administration: 
Provided that not more than fifty per cent, of the members shall be from 
amongst the persons having a judicial background. 
Explanation,-For the purposes of this clause, the expression 
"persons having a judicial background" shall mean persons having 4 
Consumer Protection (Amendmen4 
knowledge and experience for at least a pedal d tan years as a presiding 
officer qt the district level .court or any tribunal at quiwlent lev@: 
further that a person shall be disqualified fw appdntmtmt if 
he- , 
(a) has been convicted and sentand t~ imprisonment for an 
offence which, in the opinion of the Central Onvernment, invalves mml 
turpitude; or 
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(c) is of unsound, mind and stands sa declared by aeczmpetant wu* 
or 
(d) has been removed or dismissed fm the service dthe Qam- 
ment or a body corporate ow~ed or cont~lkd by tha Gavernment; or 
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central C.hvernment, such financial w 
other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him d 
his functions as a member; or 
(f) has such other disqualificadons as; may be gre%ribed by the 
Central Government: 
Provided also that every appointment undar this clause shall be madeby 
the Central Government on the recommendatian of aSdmtian Cammittee con- 
sisting of the following, namely:- 
(a) a person who is a Judge of the Supreme Court, - Chairman; 
to be nominated by the Chief Justice af lndia 
(b) the Secretary in the Department of Legal - Member; 
Affairs in the Government of India - 
(c) Secretary of the Department dealing with - Member,'; 
Consumer Affairs in the Governmanl of India 
(b) after sub-section (11, the following sub-section shall be insartd, namely+- 
"(IA) (i) The jurisdiction, powers and autharity of tho National Cmmis- 
sion may be exercised by Benches thereof, 
(ii) A Bench may be constituted by the President with ane or more mem- 
bers as the President may deem fit. 
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points 
shall be decided according to the   pinion of the majority, if there is a majority, 
but if the members are equally divided, they shall state the paint or points an 
which they differ, and make a reference to the Resident who shall either haw 
the point or points himsglf or refer the case for hearing an such point ar paints 
by one or more or the other members and such point or points, shall bedecided 
according to the opinion of the majority of the members who haw heard the 
case, including thase who first heard it."; 
(c) f~r sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall b~ substituted, 
namely:- . 
"(3) Every member of the National Commission shall hold off@ for a 
term of five years or u4 to the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that a &ember shall be eligible for re-appointment for another 
term of five years or up to the age of seventy years, whichever L earliar, 
subject to the conditidn that he fulfil8 the qualifications and othw conditions Consumer Protection (Amendment) [ACT 62 
for appointment mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (I) and such re-ap- 
pointment is made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Com- 
mittee: 
Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the National 
Commission shall also be eligible for re-appointment in the manner provided 
in clause (a) of sub-section (I): 
Provided also that a member may resign his office in writing under his 
hand addressed to the Central Government and on such resignation being ac- 
cepted, his office shall become vacant and may be filled by appointment of a 
person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub-section (I) in re- 
lation to the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the 
provisions of sub-section (IA) in place of the person who has resigned. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3). a person ap- 
pointed as a President or as a member before the commencement of the Con- 
sumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002 shall continue to hold such office as 
President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his term.". 
Amendment of 19. In section 21 of the principal Act, in clause (a), in sub-clause (i), for the words \ation 21. "rupees twenty lakhs", the words "rupees one crore" shall be substituted. 
Substitution of 20. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, 
lleW 9edbnS namely :- 
lor section 22. 
Power and "22. (1) The provisions of sections 12, 13 and 14 and the rules made thereunder 
procedure for the disposal of complaints by the District Forum shall, with such modifications as :~pplicable to 
[lie National may be considered necessary by the Commission, be applicable to the disposal of 
<'ommission. disputes by the National, Commission. 
(2j Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (I), the Na- 
tional Commission shall have the power to review any order made by it, when there is 
an error apparent on the face of record. 
Power to set 22A. Where an order is passed by the National Commission exparte against the 
aside ex park opposite party or a complainant, as the case may,be, the aggrieved party may apply to orders. the Commission to set aside the said order in the interest of justice. 
Transfer of 22B. On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the National 
cases. Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer 
any complaint pending before the District Forum of one State to a District Forum of 
another State or before one State Commission to another State Commission. 
Circuit 22C. The National Commission shall ordinarily function at New Delhi and 
13enches. perform its functions at such other place as the Central Government may, in consul- 
tation with the National Commission, notify in the Official Gazette, from time to 
time. , 
Vacancy in the 22D. When the office of President of a District Forum, State Commission, or of 
office of the National Commission, as the case may be, is vacant or a person occupying such President. office is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, 
these shall be performed by the senior-most member of the District Forum, the State 
Commission or of the National Commission, as the case may be: 
Provided that where a retired Judge of a High Court is a member of the 
National Commission, such member or where the number of such members is more 
than one, the senior-most person amongst such members, shall preside over the Na- 
tional Commission in the absence of President of that Commission.". 
1 Amendment of 
i 21. In section 23 of the principal Act, after the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
23. inserted, namely:- OF 20021 Consumer Protection (Amendment) 4 17 
"Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount 
in terms of an order of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme 
Court unless that person has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that 
amount or rupees fifty thousand, whichever is less.". 
22. For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, Substitution of 
namely:- new section for section 25. 
"25. (I) Where an interim order made under this Act is not complied with, the Enforcement 
District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may of orden of the 
District Forum. be, may order the property of the person, not complying with such order to be the State attached. Commission or 
the National (2) No attachment made under sub-section (I) shall remain in force for more Commission, 
than three months at the end of which, if the non-compliance continues, the property 
attached may be sold and out of the proceeds thereof, the District Forum or the State 
Commission or the National Commission may award such damages as it thinks fit to 
the complainant and shall pay the balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto. 
(3) Where any amount is due from any person under an order made by a Dis- 
trict Forum, State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, the 
person entitled to the amount may make an application to the District Forum, the 
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, and such District 
Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission may issue a certificate 
for the said amount to the Collector of the district (by whatever name called) and ;he 
Collector shall proceed to recover the amount in the same manner as arrears of land 
revenue.". 
23. In section 27 of the principal Act,-- Amendment of 
(a) the proviso shall be omitted; section 27. 
(b) after the proviso so omitted, the existing section 27 shall be renumbered as 
sub-section (I) and after sub-section (I) as so renumbered, the following sub-sec- 
tions shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, the District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the 
case may be, shall have the power of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the trial 
of offences under this Act, and on such conferment of powers, the District Forum or 
the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, on whom the 
powers are so conferred, shall be deemed to be a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
for the purpose of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(3) All offences under this Act may be tried summarily by the District Forum or 
the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be.". 
24. After section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, insertion of 
namely :- new sectipn 
27A. 
"27A. (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Proce- Appeal 
dure, 1973, an appeal under section 27, both on facts and on law, shall lie from- against order 
passed under (a) the order made by the District Forum to the State Commission; section 37. 
(b) the order made by the State Commission to the National Commission; 
and 
(c) the order made by the National Commission to the Supreme Court. 
(2) ~xce~t as aforesaid, no appeal shall lie to any court from any ~rder of a 
District Forum or a State Commission or the National Commission. 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty 
days from the date of an order of a District Forum or a State Commission or, as the 
case may be, the National Commission: 418 Consumer Protection (Amendmenl) [ACT 62 
Prouided that the State Commission or the National Commission or the 
Supme Court, as the case may be, may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the 
said period of thirty days, if, it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for 
not preferring the appea! within the period of thirty days.". 
25, ARer section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
n-b,~ 
"28A. (1) All notices, required by this Act to be served, shall be served in the 
manner hereinab mentioned in sub-section (2). 
(2) The service of notices may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy 
themof By registered post acknowledgment due addressed to opposite party against 
whom complaint is made or to the complainant by speed post or by such courier 
service as ax approved by the District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Commision, as thecase may be, or by any other means of transmission of documents 
(including FAX m&we). 
(3) When an ~rzzkwowledgment or any other receigt puy~o~+hp to be signed by 
the opposite party or his agent or by the complainant is received by the District Fo- 
rum, thestate Commission or the National Cmnmission, as the case may be, or postal 
article contaiitivhgthe notice is received bad by such District Forum, State Commis- 
sion orthe National Commission, with an endorsement purporting to have been made 
by a postal mplop or by any person authorised tiy the courier service to the effect 
that the opposite pxty or his agent or complainant had refused to take delivery of the 
postal article c~ntaining the notice or had refused to accept the notice by any other 
means specified in sub-section (2) when tendered or transmitted to him, the District 
Forum or the State Cotnmission or the National Commission, as the case may be, 
shall declare that the notice had been duly served on the opposite party or to the 
complainant: 
Provided that whm the notice was properly addressed, pre-pa~d and duly sent 
by registered post acknowledgment due, a declaration referred to in this sub-section 
shall be made notwithscaadlng the fact that the acknowledgment has been lost or 
rnisia$d, or &any other reason, has not been received by the District Forum, the State 
Commission orthNationa1 f30mmission, as thecase may be, within thirty days from 
the date of issue d .notice, 
(4) AN notices required to be served on an opposite party or to complainant 
shall be deemed to be suSxiently served, if addressed in the case of the opposite 
party to the place where business or profession is carried and in case of complainant, 
the place where such person actually and voluntariiy resides.". 
26. In =tion Z9 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections 
shall Be inserted, namely:-- 
"(3) if any dificulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Consumer 
Pmwction (Amendment) Act, 2202, the Central Government may, by order, do any- 
thing not inconsistent withsuch provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shull be made after the expiry of a period of two 
ye= from tk commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 
2002. 
(4) Every order made under sub-section (3) shsll be laid before each House of 
Parliament.", 
Substitution of 27. Wr section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
new swhn :- 
for section 30. OF 20021 Consumer Protection (Amendment) 419 
"30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions contained in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 
2, clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 4, sub-section (2) of section 5, sub 
section (2) of section 12, clause (vi) of sub-section (4) of section 13, clause (hb) 
of sub-section (I) of section 14, section 19, clause (b) of sub-section (1) and 
sub-section (2) of section 20, section 22 and section 23 of this Act. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions contained-in clause (b) of sub-section (2) and sub-section 
(4) of section 7, clause (b) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) of section 8A, 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) of section 10, clause (c) of sub 
section (1) of section 13, clause (hb) of sub-section (I) and sub-section (3) of 
section 14, section 15 and clause (b) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of 
section 16 of this Act.". 
28. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
"30A. (1) The National Commission may, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with 
this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient 
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particufar and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may make provisions for the cost of adjournment of 
any proceeding before the District Fenun, the State Cornlilission or the Na- 
tional Commission, as the case may be., which a party may be ordered to pay.". 
29. For section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
"3 1. (1) Every rule and every regulation & under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made. before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session, f0r.a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the mion or the successive sessions afWd. 
Wh Houses agree in making my dfication i~ the rule or regulation or both 
Houses agree that the Nle or reguWctar &oaM not be made, the rule or rqula- 
tion shall theraftex have &kct only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that my such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice ta the vdklii daything previously done uk that rule or 
regulation. 
(2) Every rule made by a State Chwmmmt under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made. Wore the WCe Legislature.". Power to make 
rules. 
Insertion of 
new section 
30A. 
Power ofthe 
National 
Commission to 
make 
regulations. 
Substitution of 
new section 
for section 3 1. 
Rulw and 
tegulations to 
be laid befbre 
each House of 
Pariiamcnt 
1 THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925  
 
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Power of State Government to exempt any race, sect or tribe in the State from operation of Act.  
PART II  
OF DOMICILE  
4. Application of Part.  
5. Law regulating succession to deceased person’s immoveable and moveable property, respectively.  
6. One domicile only affects succession to moveables.  
7. Domicile of origin  of person of legitimate birth.  
8. Domicile of orig in of illegitimate child.  
9. Continuance of domicile of origin.  
10. Acquisition of new domicile.  
11. Special mode of acquiring domicile in India . 
12. Domicile not acquired by residence as representative of foreign Government, or as part of his 
family . 
13. Continuance of new domicile . 
14. Minor’s domicile . 
15. Domicile acquired by woman on marriage . 
16. Wife’s domicile during marriage . 
17. Minor’s acquisition of new domicile.  
18. Lunatic’s acquisition of new domicile.  
19. Succession to moveable property in I ndia in absence of proof of domicile elsewhere.  
PART III  
MARRIAGE  
20. Interests and powers not acquired nor lost by marriage.  
21. Effect of marriage between person domiciled and one not domiciled in India.  
22. Settlement of minor’s property in contemplation of marriage.  
PART IV  
OF CONSANGUINITY  
23. Application of Part.  
24. Kindred or consanguinity.  
25. Lineal consanguinity.  2 SECTIONS  
26. Collateral consanguinity.  
27. Persons held for purpose of succession to be similarly related to deceased.  
28. Mode of computing of degrees of kindred.  
PART V  
INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  
CHAPTER  I.—Preliminary  
29. Application of Part.  
30. As to what property deceased considered to have died intestate.  
CHAPTER  II.—Rules in cases of Intestates other than Parsis  
31. Chapter not to apply to Parsis.  
32. Devolution of such property.  
33. Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or widow and kindred only, or widow and 
no kindred.  
33A. Special provision where intestate has left widow and no lineal descenda nts. 
34. Where intestate has left no widow, and where he has left no kindred.  
35. Rights of widower.  
Distribution where there are lineal descendants  
36. Rules of distribution.  
37. Where intestate has left child or children only.  
38. Where intestate has lef t no child, but grandchild or grandchildren.  
39. Where intestate has left only great -grandchildren or remoter lineal descendants.  
40. Where intestate leaves lineal descendants not all in same degree of kindred to him, and those 
through whom the more remote  are descended are dead.  
Distribution where there are no lineal descendants  
41. Rules of distribution where intestate has left no lineal descendants.  
42. Where intestate ’s father living.  
43. Where intestate’s father dead, but his mother, brothers and siste rs living.  
44. Where intestate’s father dead and his mother, a brother or sister, and children of any deceased 
brother or sister, living.  
45. Where intestate’s father dead and his mother and children of any deceased brother or sister living.  
46. Where intestate’s father dead, but his mother living and no brother, sister, nephew or niece.  
47. Where intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor father, nor mother.  
48. Where intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor parent, nor brother, nor sis ter. 
49. Children’s advancements not brought into hotchpot.  
CHAPTER III.—Special Rules for Parsi Intestates  
50. General principles relating to intestate succession.  
51. Division of intestate ’s property among widow, widower, children and parents.  3 SECTIONS  
53. Division of share of predeceased child of intestate leaving lineal descendants.  
54. Division of property where intestate leaves no lineal descendant but leaves a widow or widower 
or a widow or widower of any lineal descendant.  
55. Division of property where intestate leaves neither lineal descendants nor a widow or widower 
nor a widow or widower of any lineal descendant.  
56. Division of property where there is no relative entitled to succeed under the other provisions of 
this Chapter.  
PART VI  
TESTAMENTA RY SUCCESSION  
CHAPTER  I.—Introductory  
57. Application of certain provisions of Part to a class of wills made by Hindus, etc.  
58. General application of Part.  
CHAPTER  II—Of Wills and Codicils  
59. Person capable of making wills.  
60. Testamentary guardian.  
61. Will obtained by fraud, coercion or importunity.  
62. Will may be revoked or altered.  
CHAPTER  III.—Of the Execution of unprivileged Wills  
63. Execution of unprivileged wills.  
64. Incorporation of papers by reference.  
CHAPTER  IV.—Of privileged Wills  
65. Privileged wills.  
66. Mode of making, and rules for executing, privileged wills.  
CHAPTER  V.—Of the Attestation, Revocation, Alteration and Revival of Wills  
67. Effect of gift to attesting witness.  
68. Witness not disqualified by interest or by being execut or. 
69. Revocation of will by testator’s marriage.  
70. Revocation of unprivileged will or codicil.  
71. Effect of obliteration, interlineation or a lteration in unprivileged will.  
72. Revocation of privileged will or codicil.  
73. Revival of unprivileged will . 
CHAPTER  VI.—Of the construction of Wills  
74. Wording of wills.  
75. Inquiries to determine questions as to object or subject of will.  
76. Misnomer or misdescription of object.  
77. When words may be supplied.  
78. Rejection of erroneous particulars in descr iption of subject.  
79. When part of description may not be rejected as erroneous.  4 SECTIONS  
80. Extrinsic evidence admissible in cases of patent ambiguity.  
81. Extrinsic evidence inadmissible in case of patent ambiguity or deficiency.  
82. Meaning or clause to be collected from entire Will.  
83. When words may be understood in restricted sense, and when in sense wider than usual.  
84. Which of two possible constructions preferred.  
85. No part rejected, if it can be reasonably construed.  
86. Interpretation of words repeated in different parts of will.  
87. Testator’s intention to be effectuated as far as possible.  
88. The last of two inconsistent clauses prevails.  
89. Will or bequest void for uncertainty.  
90. Words describing subject refer to property answering description at testator’s death.  
91. Power of appointment executed by general bequest.  
92. Implied gift to objects of power in default of appointment.  
93. Bequest to “heirs,” etc., of particular person without qualifying terms.  
94. Bequest to “representati ves”, etc., of particular person.  
95. Bequest without words of limitation.  
96. Bequest in alternative.  
97. Effect of words describing a class added to bequest to person.  
98. Bequest to class of persons under general description only.  
99. Construction of te rms. 
100. Words expressing relationship denote only legitimate relatives or failing such relatives reputed 
legitimate.  
101. Rules of construction where will purports to make two bequests to same person.  
102. Constitution of residuary legatee.  
103. Property  to which residuary legatee entitled.  
104. Time of vesting legacy in general terms.  
105. In what case legacy lapses.  
106. Legacy does not lapse if one of two joint legatees die before testator.  
107. Effect of words showing testator’s intention to give distinct shares.  
108. When lapsed share goes as undisposed of.  
109. When bequest to testator’s child or lineal descendant does not lapse on his death in testator’s 
lifetime.  
110. Bequest to A for benefit of B does not lapse by A’s death.  
111. Survivorship in case of bequest to described class.  
CHAPTER VII.—Of void Bequests  
112. Bequest to person by particular description, who is not in existence at testator’s death.  
113. Bequest to person not in existence at testator’s death subject to prior bequest.  5 SECTIO NS 
114. Rule against perpetuity.  
115. Bequest to a class some of whom may come under rules in sections 113 and 114.  
116. Bequest to take effect on failure of prior bequest.  
117. Effect of direction for accumulation.  
118. Bequest to religious or charitable uses.  
CHAPTER  VIII. —Of the vesting of Legacies  
119. Date of vesting of legacy when payment or possession postponed.  
120. Date of vesting when legacy contingent upon specified uncertain event.  
121. Vesting of interest in bequest to such members of a class a s shall have attained particular age.  
CHAPTER  IX.—Of Onerous Bequests  
122. Onerous bequests.  
123. One of two separate and independent bequests to same person may be accepted, and other 
refused.  
CHAPTER  X.—Of Contingent Bequests  
124. Bequest contingent upon  specified uncertain event, no time being mentioned for its occurrence.  
125. Bequest to such of certain persons as shall be surviving at some period not specified.  
CHAPTER  XI.—Of Conditional Bequests  
126. Bequest upon impossible condition.  
127. Bequest upo n illegal or immoral condition.  
128. Fulfilment of condition precedent to vesting of legacy.  
129. Bequest to A and on failure of prior bequest to B.  
130. When second bequest not to take effect on failure of first.  
131. Bequest over, conditional upon happen ing or not happening of specified uncertain event.  
132. Condition must be strictly fulfilled.  
133. Original bequest not affected by invalidity of second.  
134. Bequest conditioned that it shall cease to have effect in case a specified uncertain event shall 
happen, or not happen.  
135. Such condition must not be invalid under section 120.  
136. Result of legatee rendering impossible or indefinitely postponing act for which no time 
specified, and on non -performance of which subject -matter to go over.  
137. Perfor mance of condition, precedent or subsequent, within specified time. Further time In case 
of fraud.  
CHAPTER  XII.—Of Bequests with Directions as to Application or Enjoyment  
138. Direction that fund be employed in particular manner following absolute bequest of same to or 
for benefit of any person.  
139. Direction that mode of enjoyment of absolute bequest is to be restricted, to secure specified 
benefit for legatee.  6 SECTIONS  
140. Bequest of fund for certain purposes, some of which cannot be fulfilled.  
CHAPTER  XIII. —Of Bequests to an Executor  
141. Legatee named as executor cannot take unless be shows intention to act as executor.  
CHAPTER  XIV.—Of Specific Legacies  
142. Specific legacy defined.  
143. Bequest of certain sum where stocks, etc., in which invested are  described.  
144. Bequest of stock where testator had, at date of will, equal or greater amount of stock of same 
kind.  
145. Bequest of money where not payable until part of testator ’s property disposed of in certain way.  
146. When enumerated articles not de emed specifically bequeathed.  
147. Retention, in form, of specific bequest to several persons in succession.  
148. Sale and investment of proceeds of property bequeathed to two or more persons in succession.  
149. Where deficiency of assets to pay legacies, specific legacy not to abate with general legacies.  
CHAPTER  XV.—Of Demonstrative Legacies  
150. Demonstrative legacy defined.  
151. Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of specific legacy.  
CHAPTER  XVI. —Of Ademption of Lega cies 
152. Ademption explained.  
153. Non -ademption of demonstrative legacy.  
154. Ademption of specific bequest of right to receive something from third party.  
155. Ademption pro tanto  by testator’s receipt of part of entire thing specifically bequeathed.  
156. Ademption pro tanto  by testator’s receipt of portion of entire fund of which portion has been 
specically bequeathed.  
157. Order of payment where portion of fund specifically bequeathed to one legatee, and legacy 
charged on same fund to another, and, testa tor having received portion of that fund, remainder 
insufficient to pay both legacies.  
158. Ademption where stock, specifically bequeathed, does not exist at testator’s death.  
159. Ademption pro tanto  where stock, specifically bequeathed, exists in part onl y at testator's death.  
160. Non -ademption of specific bequest of goods described as connected with certain place, by 
reason of removal.  
161. When removal of thing bequeathed does not constitute ademption.  
162. When thing bequeathed is a valuable to be received by testator from third person; and testator 
himself, or his representative, receives it.  
163. Change by operation of law of subject of specific bequest between date of will and testator’s 
death.  
164. Change of subject without testator’s knowledge.  
165. Stock specifically bequeathed lent to third party on condition that it be replaced.  
166. Stock specifically bequeathed sold but replaced, and belonging to testator at his death.  
167. Non -liability of executor to exonerate specific legatees.  7 SECTIONS  
168. Compeletion of testator’s title to things bequeathed to be at cost of his estate.  
169. Exoneration of legatee ’s immoveable property for which land -revenue or rent payable 
periodically.  
170. Exoneration of specific legatee’s stock in joint -stock compan y. 
CHAPTER  XVIII. —Of Bequests of Things described in General Terms  
171. Bequest of thing described in general terms.  
CHAPTER  XIX. —Of Bequests of the Interest or Produce of a Fund  
172. Bequest of interest or produce of fund.  
CHAPTER  XX.—Of Bequests of Annui ties 
173. Annuity created by will payable for life only unless contrary intention appears by will.  
174. Period of vesting where will directs that annuity be provided out of proceeds of property, or out 
of property generally, or where money bequeathed to be  invested in purchase of annuity.  
175. Abatement of annuity.  
176. Where gift of annuity and residuary gift, whole annuity to be first satisfied.  
CHAPTER  XXI. —Of Legacies to creditors and Portioners  
177. Creditor prima facie  entitled to legacy as well as de bt. 
178. Child prima facie  entitled to legacy as well as portion.  
179. No ademption by -subsequent provision for legatee.  
CHAPTER —XXII. —Of Election  
180. Circumstances in which election takes place.  
181. Devolution of interest relinquished by owner.  
182. Testator’s belief as to his ownership immaterial.  
183. Bequest for man’s benefit how regarded for purpose of election.  
184. Person deriving benefit indirectly not put to election.  
185. Person taking in individual capacity under will may In other character elect to take in opposition.  
186. Exception to provisions of last six sections.  
187. When acceptance of benefit given by will constitutes election to take under will.  
188. Circumstances in which knowledge or waiver is presumed or inferred.  
189. When testat or’s representatives may call upon legatee to elect.  
190. Postponement of election in case of disability.  
CHAPTER  XXIII. —Of Gifts in Contemplation of Death  
191. Property transferable by gift made in contemplation of death.  
PART VII 
PROTECTION OF PROPERTY OF DECEASED  
192. Person claiming right by succession to property of deceased may apply for relief against 
wrongful possession.  
193. Inquiry made by Judge.  8 SECTIONS  
194. Procedure.  
195. Appointment of curator pending determination of proceeding.  
196. Powers conferrable on curator.  
197. Prohibition of exercise of certain powers by curators.  
198. Curator to give security and may receive remuneration.  
199. Report from Collector where estate includes revenue paying land.  
200. Institution and defence o f suits.  
201. Allowances to apparent owners pending custody by curator.  
202. Accounts to be filed by curator.  
203. Inspection of accounts and right of interested party to keep duplicate.  
204. Bar to appointment of second curator for same property.  
205. Lim itation of time for application for curator.  
206. Bar to enforcement of Part against public settlement or legal directions by deceased.  
207. Court of Wards to be made curator in case of minors having property subject to its jurisdiction.  
208. Saving of rig ht to bring suit.  
209. Effect of decision of summary proceeding.  
210. Appointment of public curators.  
PART VIII  
REPRESENTATIVE  TITLE TO PROPERTY OF DECEASED ON SUCCESSION  
211. Character and property of executor or administrator as such.  
212. Right to intes tate’s property.  
213. Right as executor or legatee when established.  
214. Proof of representative title a condition precedent to recovery through the Courts of debts from 
debtors of deceased persons.  
215. Effection certificate of subsequent probate or lett ers of administration.  
216. Grantee of probate or administration alone to sue, etc., until same revoked.  
PART IX  
PROBATE , LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF ASSETS OF  DECEASED  
217. Application of Part.  
CHAPTER  I.—Of Grant of Probate and Letters of Administration  
218. To whom administration may be granted, where deceased is a Hindu, Muhammadan, Budhist, 
Sikh, Jaina or exempted person.  
219. Where deceased is not a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or exempted person.  
220. Effect of l etters of administration.  
221. Acts not validated by administration.  
222. Probate only to appointed executor . 
223. Persons to whom probate cannot be granted.  9 SECTIONS  
224. Grant of probate to several executors simultaneously or at different times.  
225. Sep arate probate of codicil discovered after grant of probate.  
226. Accrual of representation to surviving executor.  
227. Effect of probate.  
228. Administration, with copy annexed, of authenticated copy of will proved abroad.  
229. Grant of administration wher e executor has not renounced.  
230. Form and effect of renunciation of executorship.  
231. Procedure where executor renounces or fails to accept within time limited.  
232. Grant of administration to universal or residuary legatees.  
233. Right to administratio n of representative of deceased residuary legatee.  
234. Grant of administration where no executor, nor residuary legatee nor representative of such 
legatee.  
235. Citation before grant of administration to legatee other than universal or residuary.  
236. To whom administration may not be granted.  
236A. Laying of rules before State Legislature.  
CHAPTER  II—Of Limited Grants  
Grants limited in duration  
237. Probate of copy or draft of lost will.  
238. Probate of contents or lost of destroyed will.  
239. Probate of  copy where original exists.  
240. Administration until will produced.  
Grants for the use and benefit of others having right  
241. Administration , with will annexed, to attorney of absent executor.  
242. Administration, with will annexed to attorney of a abse nt person who, if present, would be 
entitled to administer.  
243. Administration to attorney of absent person entitled to administer in case of intestacy.  
244. Administration during minority of sole executor or residuary legatee.  
245. Administration during minority of several executors or residuary legatee.  
246. Administration for use and benefit of lunatic or minor.  
247. Administration pendente lite . 
Grants for special purposes  
248. Probate limited to purpose specified in will.  
249. Administration, with wil l annexed, limited to particular purpose.  
250. Administration limited to property in which person has beneficial interest.  
251. Administration limited to suit.  
252. Administration limited to purpose of becoming party to suit to be brought against administr ator. 
253. Administration limited to collection and preservation of deceased’s property.  10 SECTIONS  
254. Appointment, as administrator, of person other than one who, in ordinary circumstances, would 
be entitled to administration.  
Grants with exception  
255. Probate or administration, with will annexed, subject to exception.  
256. Administration with exception.  
Grants of the rest  
257. Probate or administration of rest.  
Grant of effects unadministered  
258. Grant of effects unadministered.  
259. Rules as to grants  of effects unadministered.  
260. Administration when limited grant expired and still some part of estate unadministered.  
CHAPTER  III.—Alteration and Revocation of Grants  
261. What errors may be rectified by Court.  
262. Procedure where codicil discovered af ter grant of administration with will annexed.  
263. Revocation or annulment for just cause.  
CHAPTER  IV.—Of the Practice in granting and revoking Probates and  
Letters of Administration  
264. Jurisdiction of District Judge in granting and revoking probates, e tc. 
265. Power to appoint delegate of District Judge to deal with non -contentious cases.  
266. District Judge’s powers as to grant of probate and administration.  
267. District Judge may order person to produce testamentary papers.  
268. Proceedings of Distri ct Judge’s Court in relation to probate and administration.  
269. When and how District Judge to interfere for protection of property.  
270. When probate or administration may be granted by District Judge.  
271. Disposal of application made to Judge of distri ct in which deceased had no fixed abode.  
272. Probate and letters of administration may be granted by Delegate.  
273. Conclusiveness of probate or letters of administration.  
274. Transmission to High Courts of certificate of grants under proviso to section 273. 
275. Conclusiveness of application for probate or administration if properly made and verified.  
276. Petition for probate.  
277. In what cases translation of will to be annexed to petition. Verification of translation by person 
other than Court transla tor. 
278. Petition for letters of administration.  
279. Addition to statement in petition, etc., for probate or letters of administration in certain cases.  
280. Petition for probate, etc., to be signed and verified.  
281. Verification of petition for probate , by one witness to will.  
282. Punishment for false averment in petition or declaration.  11 SECTIONS  
283. Powers of District Judge.  
284. Caveats against grant of probate or administration.  
285. After entry of caveat, no proceeding taken on petition until afte r notice to caveator.  
286. District Delegate when not to grant probate or administration.  
287. Power to transmit statement to District Judge in doubtful cases where no contention.  
288. Procedure where there is contention of District Delegate thinks probate  or letters of 
administration should be refused in his Court.  
289. Grant of probate to be under seal of Court.  
290. Grant of letters of administration to be under seal of Court.  
291. Administration -bond  
292. Assignment of administration -bond.  
293. Time for  grant of probate and administration.  
294. Filing of original wills of which probate or administration with will annexed  granted.  
295. Procedure in contentious cases.  
296. Surrender of revoked probate or letters of administration . 
297. Payment to executor  or administrator before probate or administration revoked.  
298. Power to refuse letters of administration.  
299. Appeals from orders of District Judge.  
300. Concurrent jurisdiction of High Court.  
301. Removal of executor or administrator and provision for successor.  
302. Directions to executor or administrator.  
CHAPTER  V.—Of Executors of their own Wrong  
303. Executor of his own wrong.  
304. Liability of executor of his own wrong.  
CHAPTER  VI.—Of the Powers of an Executor or Administrator  
305. In respect of ca uses of action surviving deceased and debts due at death.  
306. Demands and rights of action of or against deceased survive to and against executor or 
administrator.  
307. Power of executor or administrator to dispose of property.  
308. General powers of admi nistration.  
309. Commission or agency charges.  
310. Purchase by executor or administrator of deceased’s property.  
311. Powers of several executors or administrators exercisable by one.  
312. Survival of powers on death of one of several executors or adminis trators.  
313. Powers of administrator of effects unadministered.  
314. Powers of administrator during minority.  
315. Powers of married executrix or administratrix.  12 CHAPTER  VII.—Of the Duties of an Executor or Administrator  
SECTIONS  
316. As to deceased’s fun eral. 
317. Inventory and account.  
318. Inventory to include property in any part of India in certain cases.  
319. As to property of, and debts owing to, deceased.  
320. Expenses to be paid before all debts.  
321. Expenses to be paid next after such expenses.  
322. Wages for certain services to be next paid, and then other debts.  
323. Save as aforesaid, all debts to be paid equally and rateably.  
324. Application of moveable property to payment of debts where domicile not in India.  
325. Debts to be paid before le gacies.  
326. Executor or administrator not bound to pay legacies without indemnity.  
327. Abatement of general legacies.  
328. Non -abatement of specific legacy when assets sufficient to pay debts.  
329. Right under demonstrative legacy when assets sufficient to pay debts and necessary expenses.  
330. Rateable abatement of specific legacies.  
331. Legacies treated as general for purpose of abatement.  
CHAPTER  VIII. —Of assent to a legacy by Executor or Administrator  
332. Assent necessary to complete legatee’s title . 
333. Effect of executor’s assent to specific legacy.  
334. Conditional assent.  
335. Assent of executor to his own legacy.  
336. Effect of executor’s assent.  
337. Executor when to deliver legacies.  
CHAPTER  IX.—Of the Payment and Apportionment of Annuities  
338. Commencement of annuity when no time fixed by will.  
339. When annuity, to be paid quarterly or monthly, first falls due.  
340. Dates of successive payments when first payment directed to be made within a given time or on 
day certain: death of annuitant before date of payment.  
CHAPTER  X.—Of the Investment of Funds to Provide for Legacies  
341. Investment of sum bequeathed, where legacy, not specific, given for life.  
342. Investment of general legacy, to be paid at future time: disposal of intermediate, interest.  
343. Procedure when no fund charged with, or appropriated to, annuity.  
344. Transfer to residuary legatee of contingent bequest.  
345. Investment of residue bequeathed for life, without direction to invest in particular securities.  
346. Investment  of residue bequeathed for life, with direction to invest in specified securities.  
347. Time and manner of conversion and investment.  13 SECTIONS  
348. Procedure where minor entitled to immediate payment or possession of bequest, and no direction 
to pay to per son on his behalf.  
CHAPTER  XL.—Of the Produce and Interest of Legacies  
349. Legatee’s title to produce of specific legacy.  
350. Residuary legatee’s title to produce of residuary fund.  
351. Interest when no time fixed for payment of general legacy.  
352. Int erest when time fixed.  
353. Rate of interest.  
354. No interest on arrears of annuity within first year after testator’s death.  
355. Interest on sum to be invested produce annuity.  
CHAPTER  XII.—Of the Refunding of Legacies  
356. Refund of legacy paid under C ourt’s orders.  
357. No refund if paid voluntarily.  
358. Refund when legacy has become due on performance of condition within further time allowed 
under section 137.  
359. When each legatee compellable to refund in proportion.  
360. Distribution of assets.  
361. Creditor may call upon legatee to refund.  
362. When legatee, not satisfied or compelled to refund under section 361, cannot oblige one paid in 
full to refund.  
363. When unsatisfied legatee must first proceed against executor, if solvent.  
364. Limit to r efunding of one legatee to another.  
365. Refunding to be without interest.  
366. Residue after usual payments to be paid to residuary legatee.  
367. Transfer of assets from India to executor or administrator in country of domicile for distribution.  
CHAPTER  XIII. —Of the Liability of an Executor or Administrator for Devastation  
368. Liability of executor or administrator for devastation.  
369. Liability of executor or administrator for neglect to get any part of property.  
PART X  
SUCCESSION  CERTIFICATES  
370. Re striction on grant of certificates under this part.  
371. Court having jurisdiction to grant certificate.  
372. Application for certificate.  
373. Procedure on application.  
374. Contents of certificate.  
375.  Requisition of security from grantee of certificat e. 
376. Extension of certificate.  14 SECTIONS  
377. Forms of certificate and extended certificate.  
378. Amendment of certificate in respect of powers as to securities.  
379. Mode of collecting court -fees on certificates.  
380. Local extent of certificate . 
381. E ffect of certificate.  
382. Effect of certificate granted or extended by Indian representative in Foreign State and in certain 
other cases.  
383. Revocation of certificate.  
384. Appeal.  
385. Effect on certificate of previous certificate, probate or letters of administration.  
386. Validation of certain payments made in good faith to holder of invalid certificate.  
387. Effect of decisions under this Act, and liability of holder of certificate thereunder.  
388. Investiture of inferior courts with jurisdiction of  District Court for purposes of this Act.  
389. Surrender of superseded and invalid certificates.  
390. Provisions with respect to certificates under Bombay Regulation VIII of 1827.  
PART XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
391 Saving . 
392. [ Repealed. ]. 
SCHEDULE I. —TABLE OF CONSANGUINITY . 
SCHEDULE II. — 
PART I.—ORDER OF NEXT -OF-KIN IN CASE OF PARSI INTESTATES REFERRED TO IN SECTION 
54. 
PART II.—ORDER OF NEXT -OF-KIN IN CASE OF PARSI INTESTATES REFERRED TO IN SECTION 
55. 
SCHEDULE III. —PROVISIONS OF PART VI APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN WILLS AND CODICILS 
DESCRIBED IN SECTION 57.  
SCHEDULE IV. —FORM OF CERTIFICATE . 
SCHEDULE V .—FORM OF CAVEAT . 
SCHEDULE VI. —FORM OF PROBATE . 
SCHEDULE VII. —FORM OF LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION . 
SCHEDULE VIII. —FORMS OF CERTIFICATE AND EXTENDED  CERTIFICATE . 
SCHEDULEIX. —[Repealed. ] 15 THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925  
ACT NO. 39 OF 19251 
[30th September , 1925 .] 
An Act to consolidate the law applicable  to intestate and testamentary succession  2***. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate the law applicable to intestate and testamentary 
succession  2***. It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Indian Succession Act,  1925.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is anything repug nant in the subject or context, — 
(a) “administrator ” means a person appointed by competent authority to administer the estate of a 
deceased person when there is no executor;  
(b) “codicil ” means an instrument made in relation to a Will, and explaining, altering or adding to 
its dispositions, and shall be deemed to form part of the Will;  
3[(bb) “District Judge ” means the Judge of a Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction;]  
(c) “executor ” means a person to whom the execution of the last Will of a deceased person is, by 
the testator's appointment, confided;  
4[(cc) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir;]  
(d) “Indian Christian ” means a native of India who is, or in good faith claims to be, of unmixed 
Asiatic descent and who professes any form of the Christian religion;  
(e) “minor ” means any person subject to the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) who has not 
attained his majo rity within the meaning of that Act, and any other person who has not completed the 
age of eighteen years; and “minority ” means the status of any such person;  
(f) “probate ” means the copy of a will certified under the seal of a court of competent jurisdict ion 
with a grant of administration to the estate of the testator;  
5[(g) “State ” includes any division of India having a court of the last resort;] and  
(h) “will” means the legal declaration of the intention of a testator with respect to his property 
which he desires to be carried into effect after his death.  
3. Power of State Government to exempt any race, sect or tribe in the State from operation of 
Act.—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, either retrospectively from 
the sixteenth day of March, 1865, or prospectively, exempt from the operation of any of the following 
provisions of this Act, namely, sections 5 to 49 , 58 to 191 , 212, 213 and 215 to 369, the members of any 
race, sect or tribe in the State, or of any part of such race, sect or tribe, to whom the State Government 
considers it impossible or inexpedient to apply such provisions or any of them mentioned in the order.  
                                                      
1. The Act has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941), to Manipur by the Union Territories (Laws) 
Amendment Act, 1956 (68 of 1956) and to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First 
Schedule.  
2. The words “in the Provinces of India” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Ins. by Act 18 of 1929, s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1929) . 
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
5. Subs. by s. 3 and the Schedule, ibid., for clause ( g)(w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 16 (2) The State Government may, by a like notification, revoke any such order, but not so that the 
revocation shall have retrospective effect.  
(3) Persons exempted under this section or exempted from the operation of any of the provisions of 
the Indian Succession Act, 18651 (10 of 18 65), under section 332 of that Act are in this Act referred to as 
“exem pted persons ”. 
PART II  
OF DOMICILE  
4. Application of Part. —This Part shall not apply if the deceased was a Hin du, Muhammadan, 
Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina.  
5. Law regulating succession to deceased person ’s immoveable and moveable property, 
respectively. —(1) Succession to the immoveable property in 2[India ], of a person deceased shall be 
regulated by the law of 2[India ], wherever such person may have had his domicile at the time of his death.  
(2) Succession to the moveable property of a person deceased is regula ted by the law of the country in 
which such person had his domicile at the time of his death.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, having his domicile in 2[India ], dies in France, leaving moveable property in France, moveable property 
in England, and property, both moveable and immoveable, in 2[India ]. The succession to the whole is regulated by 
the law of 2[India ]. 
(ii) A, an Englishman, having his domicile in Fra nce, dies in 2[India ], and leaves property, both moveable and 
immoveable, in 2[India ]. The succession to the moveable property is regulated by the rules which govern, in France, 
the succession to the moveable property of an Englishman dying domiciled in Fr ance, and the succession to the 
immoveable property is regulated by the law of 2[India ]. 
6. One domicile only affects succession to moveables. —A person can have only one domicile for 
the purpose of the succession to his moveable property.  
7. Domicile of or igin of person of legitimate birth .—The domicile of origin of every person of 
legitimate birth is in the country in which at the time of his birth his father was domiciled; or, if he is a 
posthumous child, in the country in which his father was domiciled a t the time of the father ’s death.  
Illustration  
At the time of the birth of A, his father was domiciled in England. A ’s domicile of origin kiln England, 
whatever may be the country in which he was born.  
8. Domicile of origin of illegitimate child. —The domicile of origin of an illegitimate child is in the 
country in which, at the time of his birth, his mother was domiciled.  
9. Continuance of domicile of origin. —The domicile of origin prevails until a new domicile has 
been acquired.  
10. Acquisition of new  domicile. —A man acquires a new domicile by taking up his fixed habitation 
in a country which is not that of his domicile of origin.  
Explanation .—A man is not to be deemed to have taken up his fixed habitation in 2[India] merely by 
reason of his residing t herein 3[the civil, military, naval or air force service of Government], or in the 
exercise of any profession or calling.  
                                                      
1. Rep. by this Act.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for “ the States ”. 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “His Majesty ’s civil, milit ary, naval or air force service” . 17 Illustrations  
(i) A, whose domicile of origin is in England, proceeds to 1[India], where he settles as a barrister or a merchant, 
intending to reside there during the remainder of his life. His domicile is now in 1[India] . 
(ii) A, whose domicile is in England, goes to Austria, and enters the Austrian service, intending to remain in 
that service. A has acquired a domicile in Austria.  
(iii) A, whose domicile of origin is in France, comes to reside in1[India] under an engagement with the Central 
Government for a certain number of years. It is his intention to return to France at the end of that period. He does 
not acquire a domicile in 1[India].  
(iv) A, whose domicile is in England, goes to reside in 1[India] for the purpose of winding up the affairs of a 
partnership which has been dissolved, and with the intention of returning to England as soon as that purpose is 
accomplished. He does n ot by such residence acquire a domicile in 1[India], however, long the residence may last.  
(v) A, having gone to reside in 1[India] in the circumstances mentioned in the last preceding illustration, 
afterwards alters his intention, and takes up his fixed h abitation in 1[India]. A has acquired a domicile in 1[India].  
(vi) A, whose domicile is in the French Settlement of Chandernagore, is compelled by political events to take 
refuge in Calcutta, and resides in Calcutta for many years in the hope of such polit ical changes as may enable him to 
return with safety to Chandernagore. He does not by such residence acquire a domicile in 1[India] . 
(vii) A, having come to Calcutta in the circumstances stated in the last preceding illustration, continues to reside 
therea fter such political changes have occurred as would enable him to return with safety to Chandernagore, and he 
intends that his residence in Calcutta shall be permanent. A, has acquired a domicile in 1[India] . 
11. Special mode of acquiring domicile in India .—Any person may acquire a domicile in 1[India]  by 
making and depositing in some office in 1[India]  appointed in this behalf by the State Government, a 
declaration in writing under his hand of his desire to acquire such domicile; provided that he has been 
resident in 1[India]  for one year immediately preceding the time of his making such declaration.  
 12. Domicile not acquired by residence as representative of foreign Government, or as part of 
his family .—A person who is appointed by the Government of one country to be its ambassador, consul 
or other representative in another country does not acquire a domicile in the latter country by reason only 
of residing there in pursuance of his appointment; nor does any other person acquire such domicile by 
reason on ly of residing with such first -mentioned person as part of his family, or as a servant.  
13. Continuance of new domicile .—A new domicile continues until the former domicile has been 
resumed or another has been acquired.  
 14. Minor ’s domicile .—The domicile o f a minor follows the domicile of the parent from whom he 
derived his domicile of origin.  
Exception .—The domicile of a minor does not change with that of his parent, if the minor is married, 
or holds any office or employment in the service of Government, o r has set up, with the consent of the 
parent, in any distinct business.  
15. Domicile acquired by woman on marriage .—By marriage a woman acquires the domicile of 
her husband, if she had not the same domicile before.  
16. Wife ’s domicile during marriage .—A wi fe’s domicile during her marriage follows the domicile 
of her husband.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for “the States”.  18 Exception. —Thewife’s domcile no longer follows that of her husband if they are separated by the 
sentence of a competent Court, or if the husband is undergoing a sentence of transportati on. 
17. Minor ’s acquisition of new domicile. —Save as hereinbefore otherwise provided in this Part, a 
person cannot, during minority, acquire a new domicile.  
18. Lunatic ’s acquisition of new domicile. —An insane person cannot acquire a new domicile in any 
other way than by his domicile following the domicile of another person.  
19. Succession to moveable property in India in absence of proof of domicile elsewhere. —If a 
person dies leaving moveable property in 1[India ], in the absence of proof of any domicile elsewhere, 
succession to the property is regulated by the law of 1[India].  
PART III  
MARRIAGE  
20. Interests and powers not acquired nor lost by marriage. —(1) No person shall, by marriage, 
acquire any interest in the  property of the person whom he or she marries or become incapable of doing 
any act in respect of his or her own property which he or she could have done if unmarried.  
(2) This section —  
shall not apply to any marriage contracted before, the first day of J anuary, 1866;  
shall not apply, and shall be deemed never to have applied, to any marriage, one or both of the parties 
to which professed at the time of the marriage the Hindu , Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion.  
21. Effect of marriage between pers on domiciled and one not domiciled in India. —If a person 
whose domicile is not in 1[India]  marries in 1[India]  a person whose domicile is in 1[India], neither party 
acquires by the marriage any rights in respect of any property of the other party not compr ised in a 
settlement made previous to the marriage, which he or she would not acquire thereby if both were 
domiciled in 1[India] at the time of the marriage.  
22. Settlement of minor ’s property in contemplation of marriage. —(1) The property of a minor 
may b e settled in contemplation of marriage, provided the settlement is made by the minor with the 
approbation of the minor’ s father, or, if the father is dead or absent from 1[India], with the approbation of 
the High Court.  
(2) Nothing in this section or in se ction 21 shall apply to any will made or intestacy occurring before 
the first day of January, 1866, or to intestate or testamentary succession to the property of any Hindu, 
Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina.  
PART IV  
OF CONSANGUINITY  
23. Application of Part. —Nothing in this Part shall apply to any will made or intestacy occurring 
before the first day of January, 1866, or to intestate or testamentary succession to the property of any 
Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or Parsi.  
24. Kindred or consan guinity. —Kindred or consanguinity is the connection or relation of persons 
descended from the same stock or common ancestor.  
25. Lineal consanguinity. —(1) Lineal consanguinity is that which subsists between two persons, one 
of whom is descended in a direct  line from the other, as between a man and his father, grandfather and 
great -grandfather, and so upwards in the direct ascending line; or between a man andhis son, grandson, 
great -grandson and so downwards in the direct descending line.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for “the States”.  19 (2) Every generatio n constitutes a degree, either ascending or descending.  
(3) A person ’s father is related to him in the first degree, and so likewise is his son; his grandfather 
and grandson in the second degree; his great -grandfather and great -grandson in the third degree , and so 
on. 
26. Collateral consanguinity. —(1) Collateral consanguinity is that which subsists between two 
persons who are decended from the same stock or ancestor, but neither of whom is descended in a direct 
line from the other.  
(2) For the purpose of as certaining in what degree of kindred any collateral relative stands to a person 
deceased, it is necessary to reckon upwards from the person deceased to the common stock and then 
downwards to the collateral relative, a degree being allowed for each person, both ascending and 
descending.  
27. Persons held for purpose of succession to b e similarly related to deceased. —For the purpose 
of succession, there is no distinction — 
(a) between those who are related to a person deceased through his father, and those who are 
related to him through his mother; or  
(b) between those who are related to a person deceased by the full blood, and those who are 
related to him by the half blood; or  
(c) between those who were actually born in the lifetime of a person deceased and those who at 
the date of his death were only conceived in the womb, but who have been subsequently born alive.  
28. Mode of computing of degrees of kindred. —Degrees of kindred are computed in the manner set 
forth in the table o f kindred set out in Schedule I. 
Illustrations  
(i) The person whose relatives are to be reckoned, and his cousin -german, or first cousin, are, as shown in the 
table, related in the fourth degree; there being one degree of ascent to the father, and another to the common 
ancestor, the grandfather; and from him one of descent to the uncle, and another to the cousin -german, making in all 
four degrees.  
(ii) A grandson of the brother and a son of the uncle, i.e., a great -nephew and a cousin -german, are  in equal 
degree, being each fou r degre es removed.  
(iii) A grandson of a cousin -german is in the same degree as the grandson of a great -uncle, for they are both in 
the sixth degree of kindred.  
PART V  
INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  
CHAPTER  I.—Preliminary  
29. Application of Part. —(1) This Part shall not apply to any intestacy occurring before the first day 
of January, 1866, or to the pr operty of any Hindu, Muhammada n, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina.  
(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 1) or by any other law for the time being in force, the provisions 
of this Pa rt shall constitute the law of 1[India] in all cases of intestacy.  
30. As to what property deceased considered to have died intestate. —A person is deemed to die 
intestate in respect of all property of which he has not made a testamentary disposition which is capable 
of taking effect,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for “the States”.  20 Illustrations  
(i) A has left no will. He has died intestate in respect of the whole of his property.  
(ii) A has left a will, whereby he has appointed B his executor; but the will contains no other provision. A has 
died intestat e in respect of the distribution of his property.  
(iii) A has bequeathed his whole property for an illegal purpose. A has died intestate in respect of the 
distribution of his property.  
(iv) A has bequeathed 1,000 rupees to B and 1,000 rupees to the eldest son of C, and has made no other bequest; 
and has died leaving the sum of 2,000 rupees and no other property. C died before A without having ever had a son. 
A has died intestate in respect of the distribution of 1,000 rupees.  
CHAPTER II.—Rules in cases of In testates other than Parsis  
31. Chapter not to apply to Parsis. —Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to Parsis.  
32. Devolution of such property. —The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, 
or upon those who are of the kindred of the decea sed, in the order and according to the rules hereina fter 
contained in this Chapter.  
1*    *   *   *  * 
33. Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or widow and kindred only, or 
widow and no kindred. —Where the intestate has left a widow —  
(a) if he has also left any lineal descendants, one -third of his property shall belong to his widow, 
and the remaining two -thirds shall go to his lineal descendants, according to the rules hereinafter 
contained;  
(b) 2[save as provided by section 33A], if he h as left no lineal descendant, but has left persons 
who are of kindred to him, one -half of his property shall belong to his widow, and the other half shall 
go to those who are kindred to him, in the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained;  
(c)if he has left none who are of kindred to him, the whole of his property shall belong to his 
widow.  
3[33A. Special provision where intestate has left widow and no lineal descendants. —(1) Where 
the intestate has left a widow but no lineal descendants and t he nett value of his property does not exceed 
five thousand rupees, the whole of his property shall belong to the widow.  
(2) Where the nett value of the property exceeds the sum of five thousand rupees, the widow shall be 
entitled to five thousand rupees t hereof and shall have a charge upon the whole of such property for such 
sum of five thousand rupees, with interest thereon from the d ate of the death of the intestate at 4 per cent. 
per annum until payment.  
(3) The provision for the widow made by this section shall be in. addition and without prejudice to 
her interest and share in the residue of the estate of such intestate remaining after payment of the said 
sum of five thousand rupees with interest as aforesaid, and such residue shall be distributed i n 
accordance with the provisions of section 33 as if it were the who le of such intestate’ s property.  
(4) The nett value of the property shall be ascertained by deducting from the gross value thereof all 
debts, and all funeral and administration expenses of  the intestate, and all other lawful liabilities and 
charges to which the property shall be subject.  
                                                      
1. The Explanation  omitted by Act 26 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -5-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1926, s. 2.  
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 21 (5) This section shall not apply —  
(a) to the property of —  
(i) any Indian Christian,  
(ii) any child or grandchild of any male person who is or was at the time of his death an 
Indian Christian, or  
(iii) any person professing the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion the succession to 
whose property is, under section 24 of the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), regulated by 
the provisions of this Act;  
(b) unless the deceased dies intestate in respect of all his property.]  
34. Where intestate has left no widow, and where he has left no kindred. —Where the intestate 
has left no widow, his property shall go to his lineal descendants or to those who are of k indred to him, 
not being lineal descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained; and, if he has left none who are 
of kindred to him, it shall go to the Government.  
35. Rights of widower. —A husband surviving his wife has the same rights in respect  of her property, 
if she dies intestate, as a widow has in respect of her husband’s property, if he dies intestate.  
Distribution where there are lineal descendants  
36. Rules of distribution. —The rules for the distribution of the intestate ’s prop erty (after  deducting 
the widow’ s share, if he has left a widow) amongst his lineal descendants shall be those contained in 
sections 37 to 40.  
37. Where intestate has left child or children only .—Where the intestate has left surviving him a 
child or children, but no more remote lineal descendant through a deceased child, the property shall 
belong to his surviving child, if there is only one, or shall be equally divided among all his surviving 
children.  
38. Where intestate has left no child, but grandchild or grandchildren. —Where the intestate has 
not left surviving him any child but has left a grandchild or grandchildren and no more remote descendant 
through a deceased grandchild, the property shall belong to his surviving grandchild if there is one, or 
shall be equally divided among all his surviving grandchildren.  
Illustrations  
(i) A ha s three children, and no more, John, Mary and Henry. They all die before the father, John leav ing two 
children, Mary three an d Henry four. Afterwards A dies intestate, leaving those nine grandchildren and no 
descendant of any decreased grandchild. Each of his grandfather will have one -ninth.  
(ii) But if Henry has died, leaving no child, then the whole is equally divided between the intestate's five 
grandchildren, the children of  John and Mary.  
39. Where intestate has left only great -grandchildren or remoter lineal descendants. —In like 
manner the property shall go to the surviving lineal descendants who are nearest in degree to the intestate, 
where they are all in the degree of gr eat-grandchildren to him, or are all in a more remote degree.  
40. Where intestate leaves lineal descendants not all in same degree of kindred to him, and those 
through whom the more remote are descended are dead. —(1) If the intestate has left lineal 
descen dants who do not all stand in the same degree of kindred to him, and the persons through whom the 
more remote are descended from him are dead, the property shall be divided into such a number of equal 
shares as may correspond with the number of the lineal descendants of the intestate who either stood in 
the nearest degree of kindred to him at his decease, or, having been of the like degree of kindred to him, 
died before him, leaving lineal descendants who survived him.  22 (2) One of such shares shall be allott ed to each of the lineal descendants who stood in the nearest 
degree of kindred to the intestate at his decease; and one of such shares shall be allotted in respect ofeach 
of such deceased lineal descendants; and the share allotted in respect of each of su ch deceased lineal 
descendants shall belong to his surviving child or children or more remote lineal descendants, as the case 
may be; such surviving child or children or more remote lineal descendants always taking the share which 
his or their parent or pa rents would have been entitled to respectively if such parent or parents had 
survived the intestate.  
Illustrations  
(i) A had three children, John, Mary and Henry; John died, leaving four children, and Mary died, leaving one, 
and Henry alone survived the fa ther. On the death of A, intestate, one -third is allot ted to Henry, one -third to John’ s 
four children, and the remaining third to Mary ’s one child.  
(ii) A left no child, but left eight grandchildren, and two children of a deceased grandchild. The property is 
divided into nine parts, one of which is allotted to each grandchild, and the remaining one -ninth is equally divided 
between the two great -grandchildren.  
(iii) A has three children, John, Mary and Henry; John dies leaving four children; and one of John ’s children 
dies leaving two children. Mary dies leaving one child. A afterwards dies intestate. One -third of his property is 
allotted to Henry, one -third to Mary’ s child, and one -third is divided into four parts, one of wh ich is allotted to each 
of John’ s three surviving children, and the remaining part is equally divided between John ’s two grandchildren.  
(iv) A has two children, and no more, John and Mary. John dies before his father, leaving his wife pregnant. 
Then A dies leaving Mary surviving him, and i n due time a child of John is born. A ’s property is to be equally 
divided between Mary and the posthumous child.  
Distribution where there are no lineal descendants  
41. Rules of distribution where intestate has left no lineal descendants. —Where an intestate  has 
left no linal descendants, the rules for the distribution of his property (after deducting the widow ’s share, 
if he has left a widow) shall be those contained in sections 42 to 48.  
42. Where intestate's father living. —If the intestate ’s father is livi ng, he shall succeed to the 
property.  
43. Where intestate’ s father dead, but his mother, brothers and sisters living. —If the intestate ’s 
father is dead, but the intestate ’s mother is living and there are also brothers or sisters of the intestate 
living, an d there is no child living of any deceased brother or sister, the mother and each living brother or 
sister shall succeed to the property in equal shares.  
Illustration  
A dies intestate, survived by his mother and two brothers of the full blood, John and Hen ry, and a sister Mary, 
who is the daughter of his mother but not of his father. The mother takes one -fourth, each brother takes one -fourth 
and Mary, the sister of half blood, takes one -fourth.  
44. Where intestate ’s father dead and his mother, a brother or sister, and children of any 
deceased brother or sister, living. —If the intestate ’s father is dead but the intestate ’s mother is living, 
and if any brother or sister and the child or children of any brother or sister who may have died in the 
intestate’ s lifetime are also living, then the mother and each living brother or sister, and the living child or 
children of each deceased brother or sister, shall be entitled to the property in equal shares, such children 
(if more than one) taking in equal shares only t he shares which their respective parents would have taken 
if living at the intestate ’s death.  
Illustration  
A, the intestate, leaves his mother, his brothers John and Henry, and also one child of a deceased sister, Mary, 
and two children of George, a deceas ed brother of the half blood who was the son of his father but not of his mother. 
The mother takes one -fifth, John and Henry each takes one -fifth, the child of Mary takes one -fifth, and the two 
children of George divide the remaining one -fifth equally betw een them.  23 45. Where intestate’s father dead and his mother and children of any deceased brother or sister 
living. —If the intestate’ s father is dead, but the intestate ’s mother is living, and the brothers and sisters 
are all dead, but all or any of them hav e left children who survived the intestate, the mother and the child 
or children of each deceased brother or sister shall be entitled to the property in equal shares, such 
children (if more than one) taking in equal shares only the shares which their respe ctive parents would 
have taken if living at the intestate’s death.  
Illustration  
A, the intestate, leaves no brother or sister but leaves his mother and one child of a deceased sister, Mary, and two 
children of a deceased brother, George. The mother takes o ne-third, the child of Mary takes one -third, and the 
children of George divide the remaining one -third equally between them.  
46. Where intestate ’s father dead, but his mother living and no brother, sister, nephew or 
niece. —If the intestate ’s father is dead , but the intestate ’s mother is living, and there is neither brother, 
nor sister, nor child of any brother or sister of the intestate, the property shall belong to the mother.  
47. Where intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor father, nor mother. —Where the 
intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor father, nor mother, the property shall be divided equally 
between his brothers and sisters and the child or children of such of them as may have died before him, 
such children (if more than one) t aking in equal shares only the shares which their respective parents 
would have t aken if living at the intestate’ s death.  
48. Where intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor parent, nor brother, nor sister. —
Where the intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor parent, nor brother, nor sister, his property shall 
be divided equally among those of his relatives who are in the nearest degree of kindred to him.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, the intestate, has left a grandfather, and a grandmother and no  other relative standing in the same or 
a nearer degree of kindred to him. They, being in the second degree, will be entitled to the property in equal 
shares, exclusive of any uncle or aunt of the intestate, uncles and aunts being only in the third degree.  
(ii) A, the intestate, has left a great -grandfather, or a great -grandmother, and uncles and aunts, and no other 
relative standing in the same or a nearer degree of kindred to him. All of these being in the third degree will take 
equal shares.  
(iii) A, the  intestate, left a great -grandfather, an uncle and a nephew, but no relative standing in a nearer degree 
of kindred to him. All of these being in the third degree will take equal shares.  
(iv) Ten children of one brother or sister of the intestate, and one child of another brogher or sister of the 
intestate, constitute the class of relatives of the nearest degree of kindred to him. They will each take one -eleventh of 
the property.  
49. Children ’s advancements not brought into hotchpot. —Where a distributive sh are in the 
property of a person who has died intestate is claimed by a child, or any descendant of a child, of such 
person, no money or other property which the intestate may, during his life, have paid, given or settled to, 
or for the advancement of, the child by whom or by whose descendant the claim is made shall be taken 
into account in estimating such distributive share.  
CHAPTER III.—Special Rules for Parsi Intestates  
1[50. General principles relating to intestate succession. —For the purpose of intestate succession 
among Parsis —  
(a) there is no distinction between those who were actually born in the lifetime of a person 
deceased and those who at the date of his death were only conceived in the womb, but who have been 
subsequen tly born alive;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1939, s. 2, for s ections  50 to 56 (w.e.f. 1 2-6-1939).  24 (b) a lineal descendant of an intestate who has died in the lifetime of the intestate without leaving 
a widow or widow er or any lineal descendant or 1[a widow or widower of any lineal descendant ] shall 
not be taken into account in determini ng the manner in which the property of which the intestate has 
died intestate shall be divided; and  
(c) where a 2[widow or widower of any relative] of an intestate has married again in the lifetime 
of the intestate, 3[such widow or widower] shall not be en titled to receive any share of the property of 
which the intestate has died intestate, and 3[such widow or widower] shall be deemed not to be 
existing at the intestate ’s death.  
4[51. Division of intestate ’s property among widow, widower, children and paren ts.—(1) Subject 
to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the property of which a Parsi dies intestate shall he divided, —  
(a) where such Parsi  dies leaving a widow or widower and children, among the widow or 
widower, and children so that the widow or widower and each child received equal shares;  
(b) where such Parsi dies leaving children, but no widow or widower, among the children in 
equal shar es. 
(2) Where a Parsi dies leaving one or both parents in addition to children or widow or widower and 
children, the property of which such Parsi dies intestate shall be so divided that the parent or each of the 
parents shall receive a share equal to half the share of each child.]  
53. Division of share of predeceased child of intestate leaving lineal descendants .—In all cases 
where a Paris dies leaving any lineal descendant, if any child of such intestate has died in the lifetime of 
the intestate, the divis ion of the share of the property of which the intestate has died intestate which such 
child would have taken if living at the intestate's death shall be in accordance with the following rules, 
namely: — 
(a) If such deceased child was a son, his widow and ch ildren shall take shares in accordance with 
the provisions of this Chapter as if he had died immediately after the intestate's death:  
Provided that where such deceased son has left a  widow or a widow of a lineal descendant but no 
lineal descendant, the res idue of his share after such distribution has been made shall be divided in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter as property of which the intestate has died intestate, 
and in making the division of such residue the said deceased son of the intest ate shall no t be taken 
into account.  
(b) If such deceased child was a daughter, her share shall be divided equally among her children.  
(c) If any c hild of such deceased child has, also died during the lifetime of the intestate, the share 
which he or she wo uld have taken if living at the intestate ’s death, shall be divided in like manner in 
accordance with clause ( a) or clause ( b), as the case may be.  
(d) Where a remoter lineal descendant of the intestate has died during the lifetime of the intestate, 
the pr ovisions of clause ( c) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the division of any share to which he or 
she would have been entitled if living at the intestate ’s death by reason of the predecease of all the - 
intestate's lineal descendants directly between him or h er and the intestate.  
5[54. Division of property where intestate leaves no lineal descendant but leaves a widow or 
widower or a widow or widower of any lineal descendant. —Where a Parsi  dies without leaving any 
lineal descendant but leaving a widow or widower or a widow or widower of a lineal descendant, the 
property of which the intestate dies intestate shall be divided in accordance with the following rules, 
namely: —  
(a) if the intest ate leaves a widow or widower but no widow or widower of a lineal descendant, 
the widow or widower shall take half the said property;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1991, s. 2, for “a widow of any lineal descendant” (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
2. Subs. s. 2, ibid., for “widow of any relative” (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “she” (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sections 51 and 52 (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 54 (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  25 (b) if the intestate leaves a widow or widower and also a widow or widower of any lineal 
descendant, his widow or her wido wer shall receive one -third of the said property and the widow or 
widower of any lineal descendant shall receive another one -third or if there is more than one such 
widow or widower of lineal descendants, the last mentioned one -third shall be divided equal ly among 
them;  
(c) if the intestate leaves no widow or widower, but one widow or widower of the lineal 
descendant, such widow or widower of the lineal descendant shall receive one -third of the said 
property or, if the intestate leaves no widow or widower but -more than one widow or widower of 
lineal descendants, two -thirds of the said property shall be divided among such widows or widowers 
of the lineal descendants in equal shares;  
(d) the residue after the division specified in clause ( a), or clause ( b) or clause ( c) has been made 
shall be distributed among the relatives of the intestate in the order specified in Part I of Schedule II; 
and the next -of-kin standing first in Part I of that Schedule shall be preferred to those standing 
second, the second to t he third and so on in succession, provided that the property shall be so 
distributed that each male and female standing in the same degree of propinquity shall receive equal 
shares;  
(e) if there are no relatives entitled to the residue under clause ( d), the whole of the residue shall 
be distributed in proportion to the shares specified among the persons entitled to receive shares under 
this section.]  
55. Division of property where intestate leaves neither lineal descendants nor a widow or 
widower nor a wido w or widower of any lineal descendant. —When a Parsi dies leaving neither lineal 
descendants nor a widow or widower nor 1[a widow or widower of any lineal descendant] his or her next -
of-kin, in the order set forth in Part II of Schedule II, shall be entitle d to succeed to the whole of the 
property of which he or she dies intestate. The next -of-kin standing first in Part II of that Schedule shall 
be preferred to those standing second, the second to the third, and so on in succession, provided that the 
propert y shall be so distributed that 2[each male and female standing in the same degree of propinquity 
shall receive equal shares.]  
56. Division of property where there is no relative entitled to succeed under the other provisions 
of this Chapter. —Where there is  no relative entitled to succeed under the other provisions of this 
Chapter to the property of which a Parsi has died intestate, the said property shall be divided equally 
among those of the intestate's relatives who are in the nearest degree of kindred to  him.]  
PART VI  
TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION  
CHAPTER I.—Introductory  
3[57. Application of certain provisions of Part to a class of wills made by Hindus, etc. —The 
provisions of this Part which are set out in Schedule III shall, subject to the restrictions and modifications 
specified therein, apply — 
(a) to all wills and codicils made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina, on or after the first day 
of September, 1870, within the territories which at the said date were subject to the Lieutenant -
Governor of Bengal or within the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High 
Courts of Judicature at Madras and Bombay; and  
(b) to all such wills and codicils made outside those territories and limits so far as relates to 
immoveable property situate within those territories or limits, 4[and 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1991, s. 5, for “a widow of any lineal descendant (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,for “each male shall take double the share of each female standing in the same degree of propinquity” (w.e.f. 
9-12-1991).  
3. Sub -section ( 1) renumbered as section 57 thereof by Act 18 of 1929, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1929) which was earlier renumbered as 
sub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 37 of 1926, s . 2 (w.e.f. 9 -9-1926).  
4. Added by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1929).  26 (c) to all wills and codicils made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina on or after the first day of 
January, 1927, to which those provisions are not applied by clauses ( a) and ( b):] 
Provided that marriage shall n ot revoke any such will or codicil. ] 
1*   *   *   *   * 
58. General application of Part. —(1) The provisions of this Part shall not apply to testamentary 
succession to the property of any Muhammadan nor, save as provided by section 57, to testamentary 
succession to the property of any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina; nor shall they apply to any wi ll made 
before the first day of January, 1866.  
(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 1) or by any other law for the time being in force the provisions 
of this Part shall constitute the law of 2[India] applicable to all cases of testatmentary succession.  
CHAPTER  II—Of Wills and Codicils  
59. Person capable of making wills. —Every person of sound mind not being a minor may dispose 
of his property by will.  
Explanation  1.—A married woman may dispose by will of any property which she could alienate by 
her own act d uring her life.  
Explanation  2.—Persons who are deaf or dumb or blind are not thereby incapacitated for making a 
will if they are able to know what they do by it.  
Explanation  3.—A person who is ordinarily insane may make a will during interval in which he is of 
sound mind.  
Explanation  4.—No person can make a will while he is in such a state of mind, whether arising from 
intoxication or from illness or from any other cause, tha t he does not know what he is doing.  
Illustrations  
(i) A can perceive what is going on in his immediate neighbourhood, and can answer familiar questions, but has 
not a competent understanding as to the nature of his property, or the persons who are of kind red to him, or in whose 
favour it would be proper that he should make his will. A cannot make a valid will.  
(ii) A executes an instrument purporting to be his will, but he does not understand the nature of the instrument, 
nor the effect of its provisions. This instrument is not a valid will.  
(iii) A, being very feeble and debilitated, but capable of exercising a judgment as to the proper mode of 
disposing of his property, makes a will. This is a valid will.  
60. Testamentary guardian. —A father, whatever his age may be, may by will appoint a guardian or 
guardians for his child during minority.  
61. Will obtained by fraud, coercion orimportunity. —A will or any part of a will, the making of 
which has been caused by fraud or coercion, or by such importunity as tak es away the free agency of the 
testator, is void.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, falsely and knowingly represents to the testator, that the testator ’s only child is dead, or that he has done 
some undutiful act and thereby induces the. testator to make a will in his,  A’s favour; such will has been obtained by 
fraud, and is  
(ii) A, by fraud and deception, prevails upon the testator to bequeath a legacy to him. The bequest is void.  
(iii) A, being a prisoner by lawful authority, makes his will. The will is not invalid by  reason of the 
imprisonment.  
                                                      
1. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 18 of 1929, s. 3 (w.e.f .1 -10-1929) which was earlier inserted by Act 37 of 1926, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -
9-1926).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule  for “the States”.  27 (iv) A threatens to shoot B, or to burn his house or to cause him to be arrested on a criminal charge, unless he 
makes a bequest in favour of C. B, in consequence, makes a bequest in favour of C. The bequest is void, the making  
of it having been caused by coercion.  
(v) A, being of sufficient intellect, if undistrubed by the influence of others, to make a will yet being so much 
under the control of B that he is not a free agent, makes a will, dictated by B. It appears that he wou ld not have 
executed the will but for fear of B. The will is invalid.  
(vi) A, being in so feeble a state of health as to be unable to resist importunity, is pressed by B to make a will of 
a certain purport and does so merely to purchase peace and in submis sion to B. The will is invalid.  
(vii) A being in such a state of health as to be capable of exercising his own judgment and volition, B uses 
urgent intercession and persuasion with him to induce him to make a will of a certain purport. A, in consequence of  
the intercession and persuasion, but in the free exercise of his judgment and volition makes his will in the manner 
recommended by B. The will is not redered invalid by the intercession and persuasion of B.  
(viii) A, with a view to obaining a legacy from B, pays him attention and flatters him and thereby produces in 
him a capricious partiality to A. B, in consequence of such attention and flattery, makes his will, by which he leaves 
a legacy to A. The bequest is not rendered invalid by the attention and fl attery of A.  
62. Will may be revoked or altered. —A will is liable to be revoked or altered by the maker of it at 
any time when he is competent to dispose of his property by will.  
CHAPTER  III.—Of the Execution of unprivileged Wills  
63. Execution of unprivileged wills. —Every testator, not being a soldier employed in an expedition 
or engaged in actual warfare, 1[or an airman so employed or engaged,] or a mariner at sea, shall execute 
his will according to the following rules: — 
(a) The testator shall si gn or shall affix his mark to the will, or it shall be signed by some other 
person in his presence and by his direction.  
(b) The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature of the person signing for him, 
shall be so placed that it shall appear that  it was intended thereby to give effect to the writing 
as a will.  
(c) The will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen the testator 
sign or affix his mark to the will or has seen some other person sign the will, in the presence an d 
by the direction of the testator, or has received from the testator a personal acknowledgment of 
his signature or mark, or of the signature of such other person; and each of the witnesses shall 
sign the will in the presence of the testator, but it shall not be necessary that more than one 
witness be present at the same time, and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.  
64. Incorporation of papers by reference. —If a testator, in a will or codicil duly attested, refers to 
any other document the n actually written as expressing any part of his intentions, such document shall be 
deemed to form a part of the will or codicil in which it is referred to.  
CHAPTER  IV.—Of privileged Wills  
65. Privileged wills. —Any soldier being employed in an expedition or engaged in actual warfare, 
1[or an airman so employed or engaged,] or any mariner being at sea, may, if he has completed the age of 
eighteen years, dispose of his property by a will made in the manner provided  in section 66. Such wills 
are called privileged wills.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 4 -4-1927).  28 Illustrations  
(i) A, a medical officer attached to a regiment is actually employed in an expedition. He is a soldier actually 
employed in an expedition, and can make a privileged will.  
(ii) A is at se a in a merchant -ship, of which he is the purser. He is a mariner, and, being at sea, can make a 
privileged will.  
(iii) A, a soldier serving in the field against insurgents, is a soldier engaged in actual warfare, and as such can 
make a privileged will.  
(iv) A, a mariner of a ship, in the course of a voyage, is temporarily on shore while she is lying in harbour. He 
is, for the purposes of this section, a mariner at sea, and can make a privileged will.  
(v) A, an admiral who commands a naval force, but who liv es on shore, and only occasionally goes on board his 
ship, is not considered as at sea, and cannot make a privleged will.  
(vi) A, a mariner serving on a military expedition, but not being at sea, is considered as a soldier, and can make 
a privileged will.  
66. Mode of making, and rules fo r executing, privileged wills. —(1) Privileged wills may be in 
writing, or may be made by word of mouth.  
(2) The execution of privileged wills shall be governed by the following rules: —  
(a) The will may be written wholly by the testator, with his own hand. In such case it need not be 
signed or attested.  
(b) It may be written wholly or in part by another person, and signed by the testator. In such case 
it need not be attested.  
(c) If the instrument purporting to be a will is w ritten wholly or in part by another person and is 
not signed by the testator, it shall be deemed to be his will, if it is shown that it was written by the 
testator's directions or that he recognised it as his will.  
(d) If it appears on the face of the inst rument that the execution of it in the manner intended by 
the testator was not completed, the instrument shall not, by reason of that circumstance, be invalid, 
provided that his non -execution of it can be reasonably ascribed to some cause other than the 
abandonment of the testamentary intentions expressed in the instrument.  
(e) If the soldier, 1[airman] or mariner has written instructions for the preparation of his will, but 
has died before it could be prepared and executed, such instructions shall be considered to constitute 
his will.  
(f) If the soldier, 1[airman] or mariner has, in the presence of two witnesses, given verbal 
instructions for the preparation of his will, and they have been reduced into writing in his lifetime, but 
he has died before the instrument could be prepared and executed, such instructions shall be 
considered to constitute his will, although they may not have been reduced int o writ ing in his 
presence, nor read over to him.  
(g) The soldier, 1[airman] or mariner may make a will b y word of mouth by declaring his 
intentions before two witnesses present at the same time.  
(h) A will made by word of mouth shall be null at the expiration of one month after the testator, 
being still alive, has ceased to be entitled to make a privileged w ill. 
CHAPTER  V.—Of the Attestation, Revocation, Alteration and Revival of Wills  
67. Effect of gift to attesting witness. —A will shall not be deemed to be insufficiently attested by 
reason of any benefit thereby given either by way of bequest or by way of a ppointment to any person 
attesting it, or to his or her wife or husband; but the bequest or appointment shall be void so far 
asconcerns the person so attesting, or the wife or husband of such person, or any person claiming under 
either of them.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 4 -4-1927).  29 Explanation .—A legatee under a will does not lose his legacy by attesting a codicil which confirms 
the will.  
68. Witness not disqualified by interest or by being executor. —No person, by reason of interest in, 
or of his being an executor of, a will, shall be disqualif ied as a witness to prove the execution of the will 
or to prove the validity or invalidity thereof.  
69. Revocation of will by testator ’s marriage. —Every will shall be revoked by the marriage of the 
maker, except a will made in exercise of a power of appoin tment, when the property over which the 
power of appointment is exercised would not, in default of such appointment, pass to his or her executor 
or administrator, or to the person entitled in case of intestacy.  
Explanation .—Where a man is invested with pow er to determine the disposition of property of which 
he is not the owner, he is said to have power to appoint such property.  
70. Revocation of  unprivileged will or codicil. —No unprivileged will or codicil, nor any part 
thereof, shall be trevoked  otherwise than by marriage, or by another will or codicil, or by some writing 
declaring an intention to revoke the same and executed in the manner in which an unprivileged will is 
herein before required to be executed, or by the burning, tearing, or other wise destroying the same by the 
testator or by some person in his presence and by his direction with the intention of revoking the same.  
Illustrations  
(i) A has made an unprivileged will. Afterwards, A makes another unprivileged will which purports to revo ke 
the first. This is a revocation.  
(ii) A has made an unprivileged will. Afterwards, A, being entitled to make a privileged will, makes a privileged 
will, which purports to revoke his unprivil eged will. This is a revocation.  
71. Effect of obliteration, in terlineation or alteration in unprivileged will. —No obliteration, 
interlineation or other alteration made in any unprivileged will after the execution thereof shall have any 
effect, except so far as the words or meaning of the will have been thereby render ed illegible or 
undiscernible, unless such alteration has been executed in like manner as hereinbefore is required for the 
execution of the will:  
Provided that the will, as so altered, shall be deemed to be duly executed if the signature of the 
testator an d the subscription of the witnesses is made in the margin or on some other part of the will 
opposite or near to such alteration, or at the foot or end of or opposite to a memorandum referring to such 
alteration, and written at the end or some other part of  the will.  
72. Revocation of privileged will or codicil. —A privileged will or codicil, may be revoked by the 
testator by an unprivileged will .or codicil, or by any act expressing an intention to revoke it and 
accompanied by such formalities as would be su fficient to give validity to a privileged will, or by the 
burning, tearing or otherwise destroying the same by the testator, or by some person in his presence and 
by his direction, with the intention of revoking the same.  
Explanation .—In order to the revoc ation of a privileged will or codicil by an act accompanied by 
such formalities as would be sufficient to give validity to a privileged will, it is not necessary that the 
testator should at the time of doing that act be in a situation which entitles him to  make a privileged will  
73. Revival of unprivileged will. —(1) No unprivileged will or codicil, nor any part thereof, which 
has been revoked in any manner, shall be revived otherwise than by the re -execution thereof, or by a 
codicil executed in manner herei nbefore required, and showing an intention to revive the same.  
(2) When any will or codicil, which has been partly revoked and afterwards wholly revoked, is 
revived, such revival shall not extend to so much thereof as has been revoked before the revocation  of the 
whole thereof, unless an intention to the contrary is shown by the will or codicil.  30 CHAPTER  VI.—Of the construction of Wills  
74. Wording of wills. —It is not necessary,.that  any technical words or terms of art be used in a will, 
but only that the wording be such that the intentions of the testator can be known therefrom.  
75. Inquiries to determine questions as to object or subject of will. —For the purpose of 
determining quest ions as to what person or what property is denoted by any words used in a will, a Court 
shall inquire into every material fact relating to the persons who claim to be interested under such will, 
the property which is claimed as the subject of disposition, the circumstances of the testator and of his 
family, and into every fact a knowledge of which may conduce to the right application of the words which 
the testator has used.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, by his will, bequeaths 1,000 rupees to his eldest son or to hi s youngest grandchild, or to his cousin, Mary. 
A Court may make inquiry in order to ascertain to what person the description in the will applies.  
(ii) A, by his will, leaves to B “my estate called Black Acre ”. It may be necessary to take evidence in order to 
ascertain what is the subject -matter of the bequest; that is to say, what estate of thetestator ’s is called Black Acre.  
(iii) A, by his will, leaves to B “the estate which I purchased of C ”. It may be necessary to take evidence in 
order to ascertain wha t estate the testator purchased of C.  
76. Misnomer or misdescription of object. —(1) Where the words used in a will to designate or 
describe a legatee or a class of legatees sufficiently show what is meant, and error in the name or 
description shall not pre vent the legacy from taking effect.  
(2) A mistake in the name of a legatee may be corrected by a description of him, and a mistake in the 
description of a legatee may be corrected by the name.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths a legacy to “Thomas, the second s on of my brother John ”. The testator has an only brother 
named John, who has no son named Thomas, but has a second son whose name is William. William will have the 
legacy.  
(ii) A bequeaths a legacy “to Thomas, the second son of my brother John ”. The testator has an only brother, 
named John, whose first son is named Thomas and whose second son is named William. Thomas will have the 
legacy.  
(iii) The testator bequeaths his property “to A and B, the legitimate children of C ”. C has no legitimate child, 
but has two illegitimate children, A and B. The bequest to A and B takes effect, although they are illegitimate.  
(iv) The testator gives his residuary estate to be divided among “my seven children ” and, proceeding to 
enumerate them, mentions six names only.  This omission will not prevent the seventh child from taking a share with 
the others.  
(v) The testator, having six grandchildren, makes a bequest to “my six grandchildren ” and, proceeding to 
mention them by their Christian names, mentions one twice over o mitting another altogether. The one whose name 
is not mentioned will take a share with the others.  
(vi) The testator bequeaths “1,000 rupees to each of the three children of A ”. At the date of the will A has four 
children. Each of these four children will,  if he survives the testator, receive a legacy of 1,000 rupees.  
77. When words may be supplied. —Where any word material to the full expression of the meaning 
has been omitted, it may be supplied by the context.  31 Illustration  
The testator gives a legacy of “five hundred ” to his daughter A and a legacy of “five hundred rupees ” to his 
daughter B. A will take a legacy of five hundred rupees.  
78. Rejection of erroneous particulars in description of subject. —If the thing which the testator 
intended to bequeath can  be sufficiently identified from the description of it given in the will, but some 
parts of the description do not apply, such parts of the description shall be rejected as erroneous, and the 
bequest shall take effect.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B “my marsh -lands lying in L and in the occupation of X ”. The testator had marsh -lands 
lying in L but had no marsh -lands in the occupation of X. The words “in the occupation of X ” shall be rejected as 
erroneous, and the marsh lands of the testator lying in L w ill pass by the bequest.  
(ii) The testator bequeaths to A “my zamindari of Rampur ”. He had an estate at Rampur but it was a taluq and 
not a zamindari. The taluq passes by this bequest.  
79. When part of description may not be rejected as erroneous. —If a wil l mentions several 
circumstances as descriptive of the thing which the testator intends to bequeath, and there is any property 
of his in respect of which all those circumstances exist, the bequest shall be considered as limited to such 
property, and it sha ll not be lawful to reject any part of the description as erroneous, because the testator 
had other property to which such part of the description does not apply.  
Explanation .—In judging whether a case falls within the meaning of this section, any words wh ich 
would be liable to rejection under section 78 shall be deemed to have been struck out of the will.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B “my marsh -lands lying in L and in the occupation of X ”. The testator had marsh -lands 
lying in L, some of which were in  the occupation of X, and some not in the occupation of X. The bequest will be 
considered as limited to such of the testator's marsh -lands in L as were in the occupation of X.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B “my marsh -lands lying in L and in the occupation of X, com prising 1,000 bighas of 
lands ”. The testator had marshlands lying in L some of which were in the occupation of X and some not in the 
occupation of X. The measurement is wholly inapplicable to the marsh -lands of either class, or to the whole taken 
together.  The measurement will be considered as struck out of the will, and such of the testator's marsh -lands lying 
in L as were in the occupation of X shall alone pass by the bequest.  
80. Extrinsic evidence admissible in cases of patent ambiguity. —Where the words  of a will are 
unambiguous, but it is found by extrinsic evidence that they admit of applications, one only of which can 
have been intended by the testator, extrinsic evidence may be taken to show which of these applications 
was intended.  
Illustrations  
(i) A man, having two cousins of the name of Mar y, bequeaths a sum of money to “ my cousin Mary ”. It appears 
that there are two persons, each answering the description in the will. That description, therefore, admits of two 
applications, only one of which can have been intended by the testator. Evidence is admissible to show which of the 
two applications was intended.  
(ii) A, by his will, leaves to B “my estate called SultanpurKhurd ”. It turns out that he had two estates called 
Sultanpur Khurd. Evidence is admis sible to show which estate was intended.  
81. Extrinsic evidence inadmissible in case of patent ambiguity or deficiency. —Where there is an 
ambiguity or deficiency on the face of a will, no extrinsic evidence as to the intentions of the testator shall 
be adm itted.  32 Illustrations  
(i) A man has an aunt, Caroline, and a cousin, Mary, and has no aunt of the name of Mary. By his Will he 
bequeaths 1,000 rupees to “my aunt, Caroline” and 1,000 rupees to “my cousin, Mary” and afterwards bequeaths 
2,000 rupees to “my b efore -mentioned aunt, Mary”. There is no person to whom the description given in the Will 
can apply, and evidence is not admissible to show who was meant by “my before -mentioned aunt, Mary”. The 
bequest is, therefore, void for uncertainty under section 89.  
(ii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to............leaving a blank for the name of the legatee. Evidence is not admissible 
to show what name the testator intended to insert.  
(iii) A bequeaths to B .......................rupees, or “my estate of.................. ......” Evidence is not admissible to show 
what sum or what estate the testator intended to insert.  
82. Meaning or clause to be collected from entire Will. —The meaning of any clause in a Will is to 
be collected from the entire instrument, and all its parts  are to be construed with reference to each other.  
Illustrations  
(i) The testator gives to B a specific fund or property at the death of A, and by a subsequent clause gives the 
whole of his property to A. The effect of the several clauses taken together is  to vest the specific fund or property in 
A for life, and after his decease in B; it appearing from the bequest to B that the testator meant to use in a restricted 
sense the words in which he describes what he gives to A.  
(ii) Where a testator having an estate, one part of which is called Black Acre, bequeaths the whole of his estate 
to A, and in another part of his Will bequeaths Black Acre to B, the latter bequest is to be read as an exception out of 
the first as if he had said “I give Black Acre to B, and all the rest of my estate to A”.  
83. When words may be understood in restricted sense, and when in sense wider than usual. —
General words may be understood in a restricted sense where it may be collected from the Will that the 
testator  meant to use them  in a restricted sense; and words may be understood in a wider sense than that 
which they usually bear, where it may be collected from the other words of the Will that the testator 
meant to use them in such wider sense.  
Illustrations  
(i) A testator gives t o A “my farm in the occupation of B ”, and to C “all my marsh -lands in L ”. Part of the farm 
in the occupation of B consists of marsh -lands in L, and the testator also has other marsh -lands in L, The general 
words, “all my marsh -lands in L ”, are restricted b y the gift to A. A takes the whole of the farm in the occupation of 
B, including that portion of the farm which consists of marshlands in L.  
(ii) The testator (a sailor on ship -board) bequeathed to his mother his gold ring, buttons and chest of clothes, 
and to his friend, A (a shipmate) his red box, clasp -knife and all things not before bequeathed. The testator's share in 
a house does not pass to A under this bequest.  
(iii) A, by his Will, bequeathed to B all his household furniture plate, linen, china, boo ks, pictures and all other 
goods of whatever kind; and afterwards bequeathed to B a specified part of his property. Under the first bequest is B 
entitled only to such articles of the testator ’s as are of the same nature with the articles therein enumerated . 
84. Which of two possible constructions preferred. —Where a clause is susceptible of 
two meanings according to one of which it has some effect, and according to the other of which it can 
have none, the former shall be preferred.  
85. No part rejected, if it can be reasonably construed. —No part of a Will  shall be rejected as 
destitute of meaning if it is possible to put a reasonable construction upon it.  33 86. Interpretation of words repeated in different parts of will. —If the same words occur in 
different pa rts of the same will, they shall be taken to have been used everywhere in the same sense, 
unless a contrary intention appears.  
87. Testator’s intention to be effectuated as far as possible. —The intention of the testator 
shall not be set aside because it ca nnot take effect to the full extent, but effect is to be given to it as 
far as possible.  
Illustration  
The testator by a will made on his death -bed bequeathed all his property to C.D. for life and after his decease to 
a certain hospital. The intention of th e testator cannot take effect to its full extent because the gift to the hospital is 
void under section 118, but it will take effect so far as regards the gift to C.D.  
88. The last of two inconsistent clauses preva ils.—Where two clauses of gifts in a will are 
irreconcileable, so that they cannot possibly stand together, the last shall prevail.  
Illustrations  
(i) The testator by the first clause of his will leaves his estate of Ramnagar “to A, ” and by the last clause of his 
will leaves it “to B and not to A ”. B will have it.  
(ii) If a man, at the commencement of his will gives his house to A, and at the close of it directs that his house 
shall be sold and the proceeds invested for the benefit of B, the latter disposition will prevail.  
89. Will or bequest void for uncertainty. —A will or bequest not expressive of any definite 
intention is void for uncertainty.  
Illustration  
If a testator says “I bequeath goods to A, ” or “I bequeath to A, ” or “I leave to A all the goods mentioned in the 
Schedule ” and no Schedule is  found, or “I bequeath ‘money, ’‘wheat, ’ ‘oil,’ ” or the like, without saying how much, 
this is void.  
90. Words describing subject refer to property answering description at testator ’s death. — The 
description contained in a will of property, the subject of gift, shall, unless a contrary intention appears by 
the will, be deemed to refer to and comprise the property answering that description at the death of the 
testator.  
91. Power of appointment executed by general bequest. —Unless a contrary intention appears  by 
the will, a bequest of the estate of the testator shall be construed to include any property which he may 
have -power to appoint by will to any object he may think proper, and shall operate as an execution of 
such power; and a bequest of property descr ibed in a general manner shall be construed to include any 
property to which such description may extend, which he may have power to appoint by will to any object 
he may think proper, and shall operate as an execution of such power.  
92. Implied gift to obj ects of power in default of appointment. —Where property is bequeathed to 
or for the benefit of certain objects as a specified person may appoint or for the benefit of certain objects 
in such proportions as a specified person may appoint, and the will does not provide for the event of no 
appointment being made; if the power given by the will is not exercised, the property belongs to all the 
objects of the power in equal shares.  
Illustration  
A, by his will bequeaths a fund to his wife, for her life, and direc ts that at her death it shall be divided among 
his children in such proportions as she shall appoint. The widow dies without having made any appointment. The 
fund will be divided equally among the children.  
93. Bequest to “heirs, ” etc., of particular person without qualifying terms. —Where a bequest is 
made to the “heirs ” or “right heirs ” or “relations ” or “nearest relations ” or “family ” or “kindred ” or 
“nearest of kin ” or “next-of-kin” of a particular person without any qualifying terms, and the class so 
designated forms the direct and independent object of the bequest, the property bequeathed shall 
be  distributed as if it had belonged to such person and he had died intestate in respect of it, leaving assets 
for the payment of his debts independently of such property . 34 Illustrations  
(i) A leaves his property “to my own nearest relations”. The property goes to those who would be entitled to it if 
A had died intestate, leaving assets for the payment of his debts independently of such p roperty.  
(ii) A bequeaths 10,000 rupees “to B for his life, and, after the death of B, to my own right heirs”. The legacy 
after B’s death belongs to those who would be entitled to it if it had formed part of A’s unbequeathed property.  
(iii) A leaves his pr operty to B; but if B dies before him, to B’s next -of kin; B dies before A; the property 
devolves as if it had belonged to B, and he had died intestate, leaving assets for the payment of his debts 
independently of such property.  
(iv) A leaves 10,000 rupees  “to B for his life, and after his decease to the heirs of C”. The legacy goes as if it 
had belonged to C, and he had died intestate, leaving assets for the payment of his debt independently of the legacy.  
94. Bequest to “representatives ”, etc., of particular person. —Where a bequest is made to the 
“representatives ” or “legal representatives ” or “personal representatives ” or “executors or administrators ” 
of a particular person, and the class so designated forms the direct and independent object of the  bequest, 
the property bequeathed  shall be distributed as if it had belonged to such person and he had died intestate 
in respect of it.  
Illustration  
A bequest is made to the “legal representatives ” of A. A has died intestate and insolvent. B is his adminis trator. 
B is entitled to receive the legacy, and Will apply it in the first place to the discharge of such part of A ’s debt as may 
remain unpaid: if there be any surplus B Will pay it to those persons who at A ’s death would have been entitled to 
receive an y property of A ’s which might remain after payment of his debts, or to the representatives of such persons.  
95. Bequest without words of limitation. —Where property is bequeathed to any person, he is 
entitled to the whole interest of the testator therein, u nless it appears from the Will that only a restricted 
interest was intended for  him. 
 96. Bequest in alternative. —Where a property is bequeathed to a person with a bequest in the 
alternative to  another person or to a class of persons, then, if a contrary i ntention does not appear by the 
Will, the legatee first named shall be entitled to the legacy if he is alive at the time when it takes effect; 
but if he is then dead, the person or class of persons named in the second branch of the alternative shall 
take t he legacy.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequest is made to A or to B. A survives the testator. B takes nothing.  
(ii) A bequest is made to A or to B. A dies after the date of the Will, and before the testator. The legacy goes to 
B. 
(iii) A bequest is made to A or to  B. A is dead at the date of the Will. The legacy goes to B.  
(iv) Property is bequeathed to A or his heirs. A survives the testator. A takes the property absolutely.  
(v) Properly is bequeathed to A or his nearest of kin. A dies in the lifetime of the testa tor. Upon the death of the 
testator, the bequest to A ’s nearest of kin takes effect.  
(vi) Properly is bequeathed to A for life, and after this death to B or his heirs. A and B survive the testator. B 
dies in A ’s lifetime. Upon A ’s death the bequest to the heirs of B takes effect.  
(vii) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B or his heirs. B dies in the testator's lifetime. A 
survives the testator. Upon A's death the bequest to the heirs of B takes effect.  35 97. Effect of words describing a class added to bequest to person. —Where property is bequeathed 
to a person, and words are added which describe a class of persons but do not denote them as direct 
objects of a distinct and independent gift, such person is entitled to the  whole interest of the testator 
therein, unless a contrary intention appears by the will.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequest is made —  
to A and his children,  
to A and his children by his present wife,  
to A and his heirs,  
to A and the heirs of his body,  
to A and t he heirs male of his body,  
to A and the heirs female of his body,  
to A and his issue,  
to A and his family,  
to A and his descendants,  
to A and his representatives,  
to A and his personal representatives,  
to A, his executors and administrators.  
In each of these cases, A takes the whole interest which the testator had in the property.  
(ii) A bequest is made to A and his brothers. A and his brothers are jointly entitled to the legacy.  
(iii) A bequest is made to A for life and after his death to his issue. At the death of A the property belongs in 
equal shares to all persons who then answer the description of issue of A.  
98. Bequest to class of persons under general description only. —Where a bequest is made to a 
class of persons under a general description only , no one to whom the words of the description are not in 
their ordinary sense applicable shall take the legacy.  
99. Construction of terms. —In a will —  
(a) the word “children ” applies only to lineal descendants in the first degree of the person whose 
“children ” are spoken of;  
(b) the word “grandchildren ” applies only to lineal descendants in the second degree of the person 
whose “grand children ” are spoken of;  
(c) the words “nephews ” and “nieces ” apply only to children of brothers or sisters;  
(d) the wo rds “cousins, ” or “first cousins, ” or “cousins -german, ” apply only to children of 
brothers or of sisters of the father or mother of the person whose “cousins, ” or “first cousins, ” or 
“cousins -german, ” are spoken of;  
(e) the words “first cousins once remove d” apply only to children of cousins -german, or to 
cousins -german of a parent of the person whose “first cousins once removed ” are spoken of;  
(f) the words “second cousins ” apply only to grandchildren of brothers or of sisters of the 
grandfather or grandmo ther of the person whose “second cousins ” are spoken of;  
(g) the words “issue ” and “descendants ” apply to all lineal descendants whatever of the person 
whose “issue ” or “descendants ” are spoken of;  
(h) words expressive of collateral relationship apply alike to relatives of full and of half blood; 
and 
(i) all words expressive of relationship apply to a child in the womb who is afterwards born alive.  36 100. Words expressing relationship denote only legitimat e relatives or failing such relatives 
reputed legitimate. —In the absence of any intimation to the contrary in a will, the word “child, ” the 
word  “son”, the word “daughter” or any word which expresses relationship, is to be understood as 
denoting only a leg itimate relative, or, where there is no such legitimate relative, a person who has 
acquired, at the date of the Will, the reputation of being such relative.  
Illustrations  
(i) A having three children, B, C and A of whom B and Care legitimate and D is illegi timate leaves his property 
to be equally divided among “my children ”. The property belongs to B and C in equal shares, to the exclusion of D.  
(ii) A, having a niece of illegitimate birth, who has acquired the reputation of being his niece and having no 
legitimate niece, bequeaths a sum of money to his niece. The illegitimate niece is entitled to the legacy.  
(iii) A, having in his Will enumerated his children, and named as one of them B, who is illegitimate, leaves a 
legacy to “my said children ”. B Will take  a share in the legacy along with the legitimate children.  
(iv) A leaves a legacy to “the children of B ”. B is dead and has left none but illegitimate children. All those who 
had at the date of the Will acquired the reputation of being the children of B ar e objects of the gift.  
(v) A bequeaths a legacy to “the children of B ”. B never had any legitimate child. C and D had, at the date of 
the Will, acquired the reputation of being children of B. After the date of the Will and before the death of the 
testator,  E and F were born, and acquired the reputation of being children of B. Only C and D are objects of the 
bequest.  
(vi) A makes a bequest in favour of his child by a certain woman, not his wife. B had acquired at the date of the 
Will the reputation of being the child of A by the woman designated. B takes the legacy.  
(vii) A makes a bequest in favour of his child to be born of a woman who never becomes his wife. The bequest 
is void.  
(viii) A makes a bequest in favour  of the child of which a certain woman, not married to him, is pregnant. The 
bequest is void.  
101. Rules of construction where will purports to make two bequests to same person. —Where a 
will purports to make two bequests to the same person, and a question arises whether the testator intended 
to make the second bequest instead of or in addition to the first; if there is nothing in the will to  show 
what he intended, the following rules shall have effect in determining the construction to be put upon the 
will:— 
(a) If the same specific thing is bequeathed twice to the same legatee in the same will or in the 
will and again in the codicil, he is entitled to receive that specific thing only.  
(b) Where one and the same will or one and the same codicil purports to m ake, in two places, a 
bequest to the same person of the same quantity or amount of anything, he shall be entitled to one 
such legacy only.  
(c) Where two legacies of unequal amount are given to the same person in the same will, or in the 
same codicil, the l egatee is entitled to both.  
(d) Where two legacies, whether equal or unequal in amount, are given to the same legatee, one 
by a will and the other by a codicil, or each by a different codicil, the legatee is entitled to both 
legacies.  
Explanation : In claus es (a) to ( d) of this section, the word “will”does not include a codicil.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, having ten shares, and no more, in the Imperial Bank of India, made his Will, which contains near its 
commencement the words “I bequeath my ten shares in the Imperial Bank of India to B ”. After other bequests, the 
Will concludes with the words "and I bequeath my ten shares in the Imperial Bank of India to B". B is entitled 
simply to receive A’ s ten shares in the Imperial Bank of India.  37 (ii) A, having one diamon d ring, which was given to him by B, bequeaths to C the diamond ring which was 
given by B. A afterwards made a codicil to his Will, and thereby, after giving other legacies, he bequeathed to C the 
diamond ring which was given to him by B, C can claim nothi ng except the diamond ring which was given to A by 
B. 
(iii) A, by his will, bequeaths to B the sum of 5,000 rupees and afterwards in the same will repeats the bequest 
in the same words. B is entitled to one legacy of 5,000 rupees only.  
(iv) A, by his will,  bequeaths to B the sum of 5,000 rupees and afterwards in the same will bequeaths to B the 
sum of 6,000 rupees. B is entitled to receive 11,000 rupees.  
(v) A, by his will, bequeaths to B 5,000 rupees and by a codicil to the will he bequeaths to him 5,000 r upees. B 
is entitled to receive 10,000 rupees.  
(vi) A, by one codicil to his will, bequeaths to B 5,000 rupees and by another codicil bequeaths to him, 6,000 
rupees. B is entitled to receive 11,000 rupees.  
(vii) A, by his will, bequeaths “500 rupees to B b ecause she was my nurse ”, and is another part of the will 
bequeaths 500 rupees to B “because she went to England with my children ”. B is entitled to receive 1,000 rupees.  
(viii) A, by his will, bequeaths to B the sum of 5,000 rupees and also, in another pa rt of the will, an annuity of 
400rupees. B is entitled to both legacies.  
(ix) A, by his will, bequeaths to B the sum of 5,000 rupees and also bequeaths to him the sum of 5,000 rupees if 
he shall attain the age of 18. B is entitled absolutely to one sum of 5,000 rupees, and takes a contingent interest in 
another sum of 5,000 rupees.  
102. Constitution of residuary legatee. —A residuary legatee may be constituted by any words that 
show an intention on the part of the testator that the person designated shall take the surplus or residue of 
his property.  
Illustrations  
(i) A makes her will, consisting of several testamentary papers, in one of which are contained the following 
words: —“I think there will be something left, after all funeral expenses, etc., to give to B, now at school, towards 
equipping him to any profession he may hereafter be appointed to. ” B is constituted residuary legatee.  
(ii) A makes his will, with the following passage at the end of it: —“I believe there will be found sufficient in 
my banker ’s hands to defray and discharge my debts, which I hereby, desire B to do, and keep the residue for her 
own use and pleasure. ” B is constituted the residuary legatee.  
(iii) A bequeaths all his property to B, except certain stock and funds, which he bequeaths  to C. B is the 
residuary legatee.  
103. Property to which residuary legatee entitled .—Under a residuary bequest, the legatee is 
entitled to all property belonging to the testator at the time of his death, of which he has not made any 
other testamentary dis position which is capable of taking effect.  
Illustration  
A by his will bequeaths certain legacies, of which one is void under section 118, and another lapses by the death 
of the legatee. He bequeaths the residue of his property to B. After the date of his will A purchases a zamindari, 
which belongs to him at the time of his death. B is entitled to the two legacies and the zamindari as part of the 
residue.  
104. Time of vesting legacy in general terms. —1f a legacy is given in general terms, without 
specifying  the time when it is to be paid, the legatee has a vested interest in it from the day of the death of 
the testator, and, if he dies without having received it, it shall pass to his representatives.  38 105. In what case legacy lapses. —(1) If the legatee does n ot survive the testator, the legacy cannot 
take effect, but shall lapse and form part of the residue of the testator ’s property, unless it appears by the 
Will that the testator intended that it should go to some other person.  
(2) In order to entitle the representatives of the legatee to receive the legacy, it must be proved that he 
survived the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) The testator bequeaths to B “500 rupees which B owes me ”.B dies before the testator; the legacy lapses.  
(ii) A bequest is made to A and  his children. A dies before the testator, or happens to be dead when the will is 
made. The legacy to A and his children lapses.  
(iii) A legacy is given to A, and, in case of his dying before the testator, to B. A dies before the testator. The 
legacy goes to B. 
(iv) A sum of money is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B. A dies in the lifetime of the testator; B 
survives the testator. The bequest to B takes effect.  
(v) A sum of money is bequeathed to A on his completing his eighteenth year, an d in case he should die before 
he completes his eighteenth year, to B. A completes his eighteenth year, and dies in the lifetime of the testator. The 
legacy to A lapses, and the bequest to ii does not take effect.  
(vi) The testator and the legatee perished  in the same ship -wreck. There is no evidence to show which died first. 
The legacy lapses.  
106. Legacy does not lapse if one of two joint legatees die before testator. —If a legacy is given to 
two persons jointly, and one of them dies before the testator, t he other legatee takes the whole.  
Illustration  
The legacy is simply to A and B. A dies before the testator. B takes the legacy.  
107. Effect of words showing testator’s intention to give distinct shares. —If a legacy is given to 
legatees in words which  show that the testator intended to give them distinct shares of it, then, if any 
legatee dies before the testator, so much of the legacy as was intended for him shall fall into the residue of 
the testator's property.  
Illustration  
A sum of money is bequeathed to  A, B and C, to be equally divided among them. A dies before the testator, B 
and C Will only take so much as they would have had if A had survived the testator.  
108. When lapsed share goes as undisposed of. —Where a  share which lapses is a part of the 
gener al residue bequeathed by the Will, that share shall go as undisposed of.  
Illustration  
The testator bequeaths me residue of his estate to A, B and C, to be equally divided between them. A dies 
before the testator. His one -third of the residue goes as undisp osed of.  
109. When bequest to testator’s child or lineal descendant does not lapse on his death in 
testator ’s lifetime. —Where a bequest has been made to any child or  other lineal descendant of the 
testator, and the legatee dies in the lifetime of the testa tor, but any lineal descendant of his survives the 
testator, the bequest shall not lapse, but shall take effect if the death of the legatee had happened 
immediately after the death of the testator, unless a contrary intention appears by the Will.  
Illustrat ion 
A makes his Will, by which he bequeaths a sum of money to his son, B, for his own absolute use and benefit. B 
dies before A, leaving a son, C, who survives A, and having made his Will whereby he bequeaths all his property to 
his widow. D. The money goes to D.  
110. Bequest to A for benefit of B does not lapse by A’s death. —Where a bequest is made to one 
person, for the benefit of  another, the legacy does not lapse by the death, in the testator’s lifetime, of the 
person to whom the bequest is made.  39 111. Survivorship in case of bequest to described class. —Where a bequest is made simply to a 
described class of persons, the thing bequeathed shall go only to such as are alive at the testator ’s death.  
Exception .—If property is bequeathed to a class of person s described as standing in a particular 
degree of kindred to a specified individual, but their possession of it is deferred until a time later than the 
death of the testator by reason of a prior bequest or otherwise, the property shall at that time go to s uch of 
them as are then alive, and to the representatives of any of them who have died since the death of the 
testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to “the children of B ” without saying when it is to be distributed among them. B 
had died pre vious to the date of the will, leaving three children, C, D and E. E died after the date of the will, but 
before the death of A. C and D survive A. The legacy will belong to C and D, to the exclusion of the representatives 
of E.  
(ii) A lease for years of a  house, was bequeathed to A for his life, and after his decease to the children of B. At 
the death of the testator, B had two children living, C and D, and he never had any other child. Afterwards, during 
the lifetime of A, C died, leaving E, his executor.  D has survived A, D and E are jointly entitled to so much of the 
leasehold term as remains unexpired.  
(iii) A sum of money was bequeathed to A for her life, and after her decease to the children of 13. At the death 
of the testator, B had two children living, C and D, and, after that event, two children, E and F, were born to B. C 
and E died in the lifetime of A, C having made a will, E having made no will. A has died, leaving D and F surviving 
her. The legacy is to be divided into four equal parts, one  of which is to be  paid to the executor of C, one to D, one 
to the administrator of E and oneto F.  
(iv) A bequeaths one -third of his lands to B for his life, and after his decease to the sisters of B. At the death of 
the testator, B had two sisters living,  C and D, and after that event another sister E was born. C died during the life 
of B, D and E have survived B. One -third of A ’s land belong to D, E and the representatives of C, in, equal shares.  
(v) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to B for life and after his de ath equally among the children of C. Up to the death 
of B, C had not had any child. The bequest after the death of B is void.  
(vi) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to “all the children born or to be born ” of B to be divided among them at the 
death of C. At the dea th of the testator, B has two children living, D and E. After the death of the testator, but in the 
lifetime of C, two other children, F and G, are born to B. After the death of C, another child is horn to B. The legacy 
belongs to D, E, F and G, to the exc lusion of the after -born child of B.  
(vii) A bequeaths a fund to the children of B, to be divided among them when the eldest shall attain majority. At 
the testator's death, B had one child living, named C. He afterwards had two other children, named D and E. E died, 
but C and D were living when C attained majority. The fund belongs to C, D and the representatives of E, to the 
exclusion of any child who may be born to B after C ’s attaining majority.  
CHAPTER VII.—Of void Bequests  
112. Bequest to person by par ticular description, who is not in existence at testator ’s death. —
Where a bequest is made to a person by a particular description, and there is no person in existence at the 
testator's death who answers the description, the bequest is void.  
Exception .—If property is bequeathed to a person described as standing in a particular degree of 
kindred to a specified individual, but his possession of it is deferred until a time later than the deathofthe 
testator, by reason of a prior bequest or otherwise; and if a person answering the description isalive at the 
death of the testator, or comes into existence between that event and such later time, the property shall, at 
such later time, go to that person, or, if he is dead, to his representatives.  40 Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to the eldest son of B. At the death of the testator, B has no son. The bequest is 
void.  
(ii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to B for life, and after his death to the eldest son of C. At the death of the testator, 
C had no son. After wards, during the life of B, a son is born to C. Upon B ’s death the legacy goes to .C's son.  
(iii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to B for life, and after his death to the eldest son of C. At the death of the testator, 
C had no son. Afterwards, during the life o f B, a son, named D, is born to C. D dies, then B dies. The legacy goes to 
the representative of D.  
(iv) A bequeaths his estate of Green Acre to be for life, and at his decease, to the eldest son of C. Up to the 
death of B, C has had no son. The bequest to  C’s eldest son is void.  
(v) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to the eldest son of C, to be paid to him after the death of B. At the death of the 
testator C has no son, but a son is afterwards born to him during the life of B and is alive at B ’s death. C’ s son is 
entitled to the 1,000 rupees.  
113. Bequest to person not in existence at testator's death subject to prior bequest. —Where a 
bequest is made to a person not in existence at the time of the testator's death, subject to a prior bequest 
contained in the will, the later bequest shall be void, unless it comprises the whole of the remaining 
interest of the testator in the thing bequeathed.  
Illustrations  
(i) Property is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to his eldest son for life, and after the deat h of the 
latter to his eldest son. At the time of the testator ’s death, A has no son. Here the bequest to A ’s eldest son is a 
bequest to a person n ot in existence at the testator’ s death. It is not a bequest of the whole interest that remains to the 
testator. The bequest to A ’s eldest son for his life is void.  
(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to his daughters. A survives the testator. A has 
daughters some of whom were not in existence at the tes tator’s death. The beques t to A’ s daughters comprises the 
whole interest that remains to the testator in the thing bequeathed. The bequest to A ’s daughters is valid.  
(iii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to his daughters, with a direction that, if any o f 
them marries under the age of eighteen, her portion shall be settled so that it may belong, to herself for life and may 
be divisible among her children after her death. A has no daughters living at the time of the testator ’s death, but has 
daughters born  afterwards who survive him. Here the direction for a settlement has the effect in the case of each 
daughter who marries under eighteen of substituting for the absolute bequest to her a bequest to her merely for her 
life; that is to say, a bequest to a per son not in existence at the time of the testator ’s death of something which is less 
than the whole interest that remains to the testator in the thing bequeathed. The direction to settle the fund is void.  
(iv) A bequeaths a sum of money to B for life, and d irects that upon the death of B the fund shall be settled upon 
his daughters, so that the portion of each daughter  may belong to herself for life, and may be divided among her 
children after her death. B has no daughter living at the time of the testator ’s death. In this case the only bequest to 
the daughters of B is contained in the direction to settle the fund, and this direction amounts to a bequest to persons 
not yet born, of a life -interest in the fund, that is to say, of something which is less than t he whole interest that 
remains to the testator in the thing bequeathed. The direction to settle the fund upon the daughters of B is void.  
114. Rule against perpetuity. —No bequest is valid whereby the vesting of the thing bequeathed may 
be delayed beyond th e life -time of one or more persons living at the testator ’s death and the  minority of 
some person who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period, and to whom, if he attains full age, 
the thing bequeathed is to belong.  41 Illustrations  
(i) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life and after his death to B for his life; and after B ’s death to such of the 
sons of B as shall first attain the age of 25. A and B survive the testator. Here the son of B who shall first attain the 
age of 25 may be a son born after the death of the testator; such son may not attain 25 until more than 18 years have 
elapsed from the death of the longer liver of A and B; and the vesting of the fund may thus be delayed beyond the 
lifetime of A and B and the minority of the sons of B. The bequest after B's death is void.  
(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, and after B ’s death to such of B's 
sons as shall first attain the age of 25. B dies in the lifetime of the testator, leaving one or more sons. In this case the 
sons of B are persons living at the time of the testator ’s decease, and the time ashen either of them will attain 25 
necessarily falls within his own lifetime. The bequest is valid.  
(iii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, with a direction that after B ’s 
death it shall be divided amongst such of B ’s children as shall attain the age of 18, but that, if no child of B shall 
attain that age, the fund shall go to C. Here the time for the div ision of the fund must arrive at the latest at the 
expiration of 18 years from the death of B, a person living at the testator's decease. All the bequests are valid.  
(iv) A fund is bequeathed to trustees for the benefit of the testator ’s daughters, with a direction that, if any of 
them marry under age, her share of the fund shall be settled so as to devolve after her death upon such of her 
children as shall attain the age of 18 . Any daugther of the testator to whom the direction applies must be in existence  
at his decease, and any portion of the fund which may eventually be settled as directed must vest not later than 18 
years from the death of the daughters whose share it was. All these provisions are valid.  
115. Bequest to a class some of whom may come und er rules in sections 113 and 114. —If a 
bequest is made to a class of persons with regard to some of whom it is inoperative by reason of the 
provisions of section 113 or section 114, such bequest shall be 1[void in regard to those persons only, and 
not in r egard to the whole class].  
Illustrations  
(i) A fund is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to all his child ren who shall attain the age of 25. A 
survives the testator, and has some children living at the te stator’ s death. Each child of A’ s living  at the testator ’s 
death must attain the age of 25 (if at all) within the limits allowed for a bequest. But A may have children after the 
testator ’s decease, some of whom may not attain the age of 25 until more than 18 years have elapsed after the 
decease of A. The bequest to A ’s children, therefore, is inoperative as to any child born after the  testator’ s death; 
2[and in regard to those who do not attain the age of 25 within 18 years after A ’s death, but is operative in regard to 
the other children of Al  
(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B, C, D and all other children of A who shall 
attain the age of 25. B, C, D are child ren of A living at the testator’ s decease. In all other respects the case is the 
same as that supposed i n Illustration  (i). 2[Although the mention of B, C and D does not prevent the bequest from 
being regarded as a bequest to a class, it is not wholly void. It is operative as regards any of the children B, C or D, 
who attain the age of 25 within 18 years aft er A’s death ]. 
3[116. Bequest to take effect on failure of prior bequest. —Where by reason of any of the rules 
contained in sections 113 and 114, any bequest in favour of a person or of a class of persons is void in  
regard to such person or the whole of suc h class, any bequest contained in the same will and intended to 
take effect after or upon failure of such prior bequest is also void.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 14, for “wholly void”.  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for certa in words.  
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for  section  116. 42 Illustrations  
(i) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to such of his sons as shall first attain the age of 25, 
for his life, and after the decease of such son to B. A and B survive the testator. The bequest to B is intended to take 
effect after the bequest to such of the sons of A as shall first attain the age of 25, which bequest is void under secti on 
114. The bequest to B is void.  
(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to such of his sons as shall first attain the age of 
25, and, if no son of A shall attain that age, to B. A and B survive the testator. The bequest to B is i ntended to take 
effect upon failure of the bequest to such of A ’s sons as shall first attain the age of 25, which bequest is void under 
section 114. The bequest to B is void.  
1[117. Effect of direction for accumulation. —(1) Where the terms of a will direct  that the income 
arising from any property shall be accumulated either wholly or in part during any period longer than a 
period of eighteen years from the death of the testator, such direction shall, save as hereinafter provided, 
be void to the extent to w hich the period during which the accumulation is directed exceeds the aforesaid 
period, and at the end of such period of eighteen years the property and the income thereof shall be 
disposed of as if the period during which the accumulation has been directe d to be made had elapsed.  
(2) This section shall not effect any direction for accumulation for the purpose of —  
(i) the payment of the debts of the testator or any other person taking any interest under the will, 
or 
(ii)the provision of portions for childr en or remoter issue of the testator or of any other person 
taking any interest under the will, or  
(iii) the preservation or maintenance of an y property bequeathed;  
and such direction may be made accordingly.]  
118. Bequest to religious or charitable uses. —No man having a nephew or niece or any nearer 
relative shall have power to bequeath any property to religious or charitable uses, except by a will 
executed not less than twelve months before his death, and deposited within six months from its execution 
in some place provid ed by law for the safe custody of the wills of living persons:  
2[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a Parsi.]  
Illustrations  
A having a nephew makes a bequest by a will not executed and deposited as required —  
for the relief of poor people;  
for the maintenance of sick soldiers;  
for the erection or support of a hospital;  
for the education and preferment of orphans;  
for the support of scholars;  
for the erection or support of a school;  
for the building and repairs of a bridge;  
for the making of roads;  
for the erection or support of a church;  
for the repairs of a church;  
for the benefit of ministers of religion;  
for the formation or support of a public garden;  
All these bequests are void.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 14, for section  117. 
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 1991, s. 6.  43 CHAPTER  VIII. —Of the vesting of L egacies  
119. Date of vesting of legacy when payment or possession postponed. —Where by the terms of a 
bequest the legatee is not entitled to immediate possession of the thing bequeathed, a right to receive it at 
the proper time shall, unless a contrary inte ntion appears by the will, become vested in the legatee on the 
testator's death, and shall pass to the legatee's representatives if he dies before that time and without 
having received the legacy, and in such cases the legacy is from the testator's death s aid to be vested in 
interest.  
Explanation .—An intention that a legacy to any person shall not become vested in interest in him is 
not to be inferred merely from a provision whereby the payment or possession of the thing be queathed is 
postponed, or whereby  a prior interest therein is bequeathed to some other person, or whereby the income 
arising from the fund bequeathed is directed to be accumulated until the time of payment arrives, or from 
a provision that, if a particular event shall happen, the legacy s hall go over to another person.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B 100 rupees, to be paid to him at the death of C. On A ’s death the legacy becomes vested in 
interest in B, and if he dies before C, his representatives are entitled to the legacy.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B 100 rupees, to be paid to him upon his attaining the age of 18. On A ’s death the legacy 
becomes vested in interest B.  
(iii) A fund is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B. On the testator ’s death the legacy to B becomes 
vested in interest in B.  
(iv) A fund is bequeathed to A until B att ains the age of 18 and then to B. The legacy to B is vested in interest 
from the testator ’s death. .  
(v) A bequeaths the whole of his property to B upon trust to pay certain debts out of the incom e, and then to 
make over the fund to C. At A ’s death the gift to C becomes vested in interest in him.  
(vi) A fund is bequeathed to A, B and C in equal shares to be paid to them on their attaining the age of 18, 
respectively, with a proviso that, if all of them die under the age of 18, the legacy shall devolve upon D. On the 
death of the testator, the shares vested in interest in A, B and C, subject to be divested in case A, B and C shall all 
die under 18, and, upon the death of any of them (except the last survivor) under the age of 18, his vested interest 
passes, so subject, to his representatives.  
120. Date of vesting when legacy contingent upon specified uncertain event. —(1) A legacy 
bequeathed in case a specified uncertain event shall happen does not ves t until that event happens.  
(2) A legacy bequeathed in case a specified uncertain event shall not happen does not vest until the 
happening of that event becomes impossible.  
(3) In either case, until the condition has been fulfilled, the interest of the leg atee is called contingent.  
Exception .—Where a fund is bequeathed to any person upon his attaining a particular age, and the 
will also gives  to him absolutely the income to arise from the fund before he reaches that age, or directs 
the income, or so much of it as may be necessary, to be applied for his benefit, the bequestof the fund is 
not contingent.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legacy is bequeathed to D in case A, B and C shall all die under the age of 18. D has a contingent interest 
in the legacy until A, B and C all die under 18, or one of them attains that age.  
(ii) A sum of money is bequeathed to A “in case he shall attain the age of 18, ” or “when he shall attain the age 
of 18 ”. A’s interest in the legacy is contingent until the condition is fulfilled by his attaining that age.  
(iii) An estate is bequeathe d to A for life, and after his death to B if B shall then be living; but ifB  shall not be 
then living to C. A, B and C survive the testator. B and C each take a contingent interest in the estate until the event 
which is to vest it in one, or in the other has happened.  44 (iv) An estate is bequeathed as in the case last supposed. B di es in the lifetime of A and C. Upon the death of B, 
C acquires a vested right to obtain possession of the estate upon A ’s death.  
(v) A legacy is bequeathed to A when she shall attain the age of 18, or shall marry under that age with the 
consent of B, with a proviso that, if she neither attains 18 nor marries under that ag e with B ’s consent, the legacy 
shall go to C. A and C each take a contingent interest in the legacy. A attains the age of 18. A becomes absolutely 
entitled to the legacy although she may ha ve married under 18 without the consent of B.  
(vi) An estate is bequeathed to A until he shall mar ry and after that event to B. B’ s interest in the bequest is 
contingent until the condition is fulfilled by A's marrying.  
(vii) An estate is bequeathed to A until he shall take advantage of any law for the relief of insolvent debtors, and 
after that event to B. B ’s interest in the bequest is contingent until A takes advantage of such a law.  
(viii) An estate is bequeathed to A if he shall pay 500 rupees to B. A ’s interest in the bequest is contingent until 
he has paid 500 rupees to B.  
(ix) A leaves his farm of SultanpurKhurd to B, if B shall convey his own farm of SultanpurBuzurg to C. B ’s 
interest in the bequest is contingent until he has conveyed the latter fa rm to C.  
(x) A fund is bequeathed to A if B shall not marry C withi n five years after the testator’ s death. A ’s interest in 
the legacy is contingent until the condition is fulfilled by the expiration of the five years without B ’s having married 
C, or by th e occurrence within that period of an event which makes the fulfilment of the condition impossible.  
(xi) A fund is bequeathed to A if B shall not make any provision for him by will. The legacy is contingent until 
B's death.  
(xii) A bequeaths of B 500 rupee s a year upon his attaining the age of 18, and directs that the interest, or a 
competent part thereof, shall be applied for his ben efit until he reaches that age.  The legacy is vested.  
(xiii) A bequeaths to B 500 rupees when he shall attain the age of 18 a nd directs that a certain sum, out of 
another fund, shall be applied for his maintenance until he arrives at that age. The legacy is contingent.  
121. Vesting of interest in bequest to such members of a class as shall have attained particular 
age.—Where a b equest is made only to such members of a class as shall have attained a particular age, a 
person who has not attained that age cannot have a vested interest in the legacy.  
Illustration  
A fund is bequeathed to such of the children of A as shall attain the age of 18, with a direction that, while any 
child of A shall be under the age of 18, the income of the share, to which it may be presumed he will be eventually 
entitled, shall be applied for his maintenance and education. No child of A who is under the age  of 18 has a vested 
interest in the bequest.  
CHAPTER  IX.—Of Onerous Bequests  
122. Onerous bequests. —Where a bequest imposes an obligation on the legatee, he can take nothing 
by it unless he accepts it fully.  
Illustration  
A, having shares in (X), a prospero us joint stock company and  also shares in (Y), a joint sto ck company in 
difficulties, in respect of which shares heavy calls are expected to be made, bequeaths to B all his shares in joint 
stock companies; B refuses to accept the shares in (Y). He forfeits  the shares in (X).  
123. One of two separate and independent bequests to same person may be accepted, and 
otherrefused. —Where a will contains two separate and independent bequests to the same person, the 
legatee is at liberty to accept one of them and refu se the other, although the former may be beneficial and 
the latter onerous.  45 Illustration  
A, having a lease for a term of years of a house at a rent which he and his representatives are bound to pay 
during the term, and which is higher than the house can be  let for, bequeaths to B the lease and a sum of money. B 
refuses to accept the lease. He will not by this refusal forfeit the money.  
CHAPTER  X.—Of Contingent Bequests  
124. Bequest contingent upon specified uncertain event, no time being mentioned for its 
occurrence. —Where a legacy is given if a specified uncertain event shall happen and no time is 
mentioned in the will for the occurrence of that event, the legacy cannot take effect, unless such event 
happens before the period when the fund bequeathed is pa yable or distributable.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legacy is bequeathed to A, and, in case of his death, to B. If A survives the testator, the legacy to B does 
not take effect.  
(ii) A legacy is bequeathed to A, and, in case of his death without children, to B. If  A survives the testator or 
dies in his lifetime leaving a child, the legacy to B does not take effect.  
(iii) A legacy is bequeathed to A when and if he attains the age of 18, and, in case of his death, to B. A attains 
the age of 18. The Legacy to B does not take effect.  
(iv) A legacy is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death to B, and, “in case of B ’s death without children, ” 
to C. The words “in case of B ’s death without children ” are to be understood as meaning in case B dies without 
children dur ing the lifetime of A.  
(v) A legacy is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death to B, and, “in case of B ’s death, ” to C. The words 
“in case of B ’s death ” are to be considered as meaning “in case B dies in the lifetime of A ”. 
125. Bequest to such of c ertain persons as shall be surviving at some period not specified. —
Where a bequest is made to such of certain persons as shall be surviving at some period, but the exact 
period is not specified the legacy shall go to such of them as are alive at the time o f payment or 
distribution, unless a contrary intention appears by the will.  
Illustrations  
(i) Property is bequeathed to A and B to be equally divided between them, or to the survivor of them. If both A 
and B survive the testator, the legacy is equally divided between them. If A dies before the testator, and B survives 
the testator, it goes to B.  
(ii) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B and C, to be equally divided between them, or 
to the survivor of them. B dies during the life of A; C survives A. At A ’s death the legacy goes to C.  
(iii) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B and C, or the survivor, with a direction that, if 
B should not survive the testator, his children are to stand in his place. C dies during the life of the testator; B 
survives the testator, but dies in the lifetime of A. The legacy goes to the representative of B.  
(iv) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B and C, with a direction that, in case either of 
them dies in the lifetime of A, the whole shall go to the survivor. B dies in the lifetime of A. A fterward C dies in the 
lifetime of A. The legacy goes to the representative of C.  
CHAPTER  XI.—Of Conditional Bequests  
126. Bequest upon impossible condition. —A bequest upon an impossible condition is void.  46 Illustrations  
(i) An estate is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall walk 100 miles in an hour. The bequest is void.  
(ii) A bequeaths 500 rupees to B on condition that he shall marry A ’s daughter. A ’s daughter was dead at the 
date of the will. The bequest is void.  
127. Bequest upon illegal or immoral  condition. —A bequest upon a condition, the fulfilment of 
which would be contrary to law or to morality is void.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths 500 rupees to B on condition that he shall murder C. The bequest is void.  
(ii) A bequeaths 5,000 rupees to his ni ece if she will desert her husband. The bequest is void.  
128. Fulfilment of condition precedent to vesting of legacy. —Where a will imposes a condition to 
be fulfilled before the legatee can take a vested interest in the thing bequeathed, the condition shal l be 
considered to have been fulfilled if it has been substantially complied with.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C, D and E. A marries 
with the written consent of B. C is present at the marriage. D sends a present to A previous to the marriage. E has 
been personally informed by A of h is intentions, and has made no objection. A has fulfilled the condition.  
(ii) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C and D. D dies. A 
marries with the consent of B and C. A has fulfilled the condition.  
(iii) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C and D. A marries in 
the lifetime of B, C and D, with the consent of B and C only. A has not fulfilled the condition.  
(iv) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C and D. A obtains the 
unconditional assent of B, C and D to his marriage with E. Afterwards B, C and D capriciously retract their consent. 
A marries E. A has fulfilled the condition.  
(v) A legacy is bequeathed to A on co ndition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C and D. A marries 
without the consent of B, C and D, but obtains their consent after the marriage. A has not fulfilled the condition.  
(vi) A make his will whereby he bequeaths a sum of money to B if B sha ll marry with the consent of A ’s 
executors. B marries during the lifetime of A, and A afterwards expresses his approbation of the marriage. A dies. 
The bequest to B takes effect.  
(vii) A legacy is bequeathed to A if he executes a certain document within a time specified in the will. The 
document is executed by A within a reasonable time, but not within the time specified in the will. A has not 
performed the condition, and is not entitled to receive the legacy.  
129. Bequest to A and on failure of prior bequest to B. —Where there is a bequest to one person 
and a bequest of the same thing to another, if the prior bequest shall fail, the second bequest shall take 
effect upon the failure of the prior bequest although the failure may not have occurred in the m anner 
contemplated by the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths a sum of money to his own children surviving him, and, if they all die under 18, to B. A dies 
without having ever had a child. The bequest to B takes effect.  
(ii) A bequeaths a sum of money to B, on condition that he shall execute a certain document within three 
months after A ’s death, and, if he should neglect to do so, to C. B dies in the testator ’s lifetime. The bequest to C 
takes effect.  47 130. When second bequest not to take effect on fail ure of first. —Where the will shows anintention 
that the second bequest shall take effect only in the event of the first bequest failing in a particular 
manner, the second bequest shall not take effect, unless the prior bequest fails in that particular mann er. 
Illustration  
A makes a bequest to his wife, but in case she should die in his lifetime, bequeaths to B that which he had 
bequeathed to her. A and his wife perish together, under circumstances which make it impossible to prove that she 
died before him, the bequest to B does not take effect.  
131. Bequest over, conditional upon happening or not happening of specified uncertain event. —
(1) A bequest may be made to any person with the condition super -added, that, in case a specified 
uncertain event shall happ en, the thing bequeathed shall go to another person, or that in case a specified 
uncertain event shall not happen, the thing bequeathed shall go over to another person.  
(2) In each case the ulterior bequest is subject to the rules contained in sections 120 , 121, 122, 123, 
124, 125, 126, 127, 129 and 130.  
Illustrations  
(i) A sum of money is bequeathed to A, to be paid to him at the age of 18, and if he shall die before he attains 
that age, to B. A takes a vested interest in the legacy, subject to be divested  and to go to B in case A dies under 18.  
(ii) An estate is bequeathed to A with a proviso that if A shall dispute the competency of the testator to make a 
will, the estate shall go to B. A disputes the competency of the testator to make a will. The estate goes to B.  
(iii) A sum of money is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B, but if B shall then be dead leaving a 
son, such son is to stand in the place of B. B takes a vested interest in the legacy, subject to be divested if he dies 
leaving a  son in A ’s lifetime.  
(iv) A sum of money is bequeathed to A and B, and if either should die during the life of C, then to the survivor 
living at the death of C. A and B die before C. The gift over cannot take effect, but the representative of A takes one -
half of the money, and the representative of B takes the other half.  
(v) A bequeaths to B the interest of a fund for life, and directs the fund to be divided at her death equally among 
her three children, or such of them as shall he living at her death. All the children of B die in B ’s lifetime. The 
bequest over cannot take effect, but the interests of the children pass to their representatives.  
132. Condition must be strictly fulfilled .—An ulterior bequest of the kind contemplated by section 
131 cannot take effect, unless the condition is strictly fulfilled.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legacy is bequeathed to A, with a proviso that, if he marries without the consent of B, C and D, the legacy 
shall go to E. E' dies. Even if A marries without the consent of B and C, the gift to E does not take effect.  
(ii) A legacy is bequeathed to A, with a proviso that, if he marries without the consent of B, the legacy shall go 
to C. A marries with the consent of B. He afterwards becomes a widower and marries again without the c onsent of 
B. The bequest to C does not take effect.  
(iii) A legacy is bequeathed to A, to be paid at 18, or marriage, with a proviso that, if A dies under 18 or marries 
without the consent of B, the legacy shall go to C. A marries under 18, without the con sent of B. The bequest to C 
takes effect.  
133. Original bequest not affected by invalidity of second. —If the ulterior bequest be not valid the 
original bequest is not affected by it.  48 Illustrations  
(i) An estate is bequeathed to A for his life with condition super -added that, if he shall not on a given day walk 
100 miles in an hour, the estate shall go to B. The condition being void, A retains his estate as if no condition had 
been inserted in the will.  
(ii) An estate is bequeathed to A for  her life and, if she do not desert her husband, to B. A is entitled to the estate 
during her life as if no condition had been inserted in the will.  
(iii) An estate is bequeathed to A for life, and, if he marries, to the eldest son of B for life. B, at the  date of the 
testator ’s death, had not had a son. The bequest over is void under section 105, and A is entitled to the estate during 
his life.  
134. Bequest conditioned that it shall cease to have effect in case a specified uncertain event 
shall happen, or not happen. —A bequest may be made with the condition super -added that it shall 
cease to have effect in case a specified uncertain event shall happen, or in case a specified uncertain event 
shall not happen.  
Illustrations  
(i) An estate is bequeathed to A fo r his life, with a proviso that, in case he shall cut down a certain wood, the 
bequest shall cease to have any effect. A cuts down the wood. He loses his life -interest in the estate.  
(ii) An estate is bequeathed to A, provided that, if he marries under the  age of 25 without the consent of the 
executors named in the will, the estate shall cease to belong to him. A marries under 25 without the consent of the 
executors. The estate ceases to belong to him.  
(iii) An estate is bequeathed to A, provided that, if h e shall not go to England within three years after the 
testator's death, his interest in the estate shall cease. A does not go to England within the time prescribed. His 
interest in the estate ceases.  
(iv) An estate is bequeathed to A, with a proviso that,  if she becomes a nun, she shall cease to have any interest 
in the estate. A becomes a nun. She loses her interest under the will.  
(v) A fund is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B, if B shall be then living, with a proviso that, if 
B shal l become a nun, the bequest to her shall cease to have any effect. B becomes a nun in the lifetime of A. She 
thereby loses her contingent interest in the fund.  
135. Such condition must n ot be invalid under section 120. —In order that a condition that a 
bequ est shall cease to have effect may be valid, it is necessary that the event to which it relates be one 
which could legally constitute the condition of a bequest as contemplated by section 120.  
136. Result of legatee rendering impossible or indefinitely pos tponing act for which no time 
specified, and on non -performance of which subject -matter to go over. —Wherea bequest is made 
with a condition super -added that, unless the legatee shall perform a certain act, thesubject -matter of the 
bequest shall go to anoth er person, or the bequest shall cease to have effect but no time is specified for the 
performance of the act; if the legatee takes any step which renders impossible or indefinitely postpones 
the performance of the act required, the legacy shall go as if th e legatee had died without performing such 
act. 
Illustrations  
(i) A bequest is made to A, with a proviso that, unless he enters the Army, the legacy shall go over to B. A takes 
Holy Orders, and thereby renders it impossible that he should fulfil the condit ion. B is entitled to receive the legacy.  
(ii) A bequest is made to A, with a proviso that it shall cease to have any effect if he does not marry B's 
daughter. A marries a stranger and thereby indefinitely postpones the fulfilment of the conditions. The bequest 
ceases to have effect.  
137. Performance of condition, precedent or subsequent, within specified time. Further time In 
case of fraud. —Where the will requires an act to be performed by the legatee within a specified time, 
either as a condition to be fulfilled before the legacy is enjoyed, or as a condition upon the non -fulfilment 
of which the subject -matter of the bequest is to go over to  another person or the bequest is to cease to 
have effect, the act must be performed within the time specified, unless the performance of it be 
prevented by fraud, in which case such further time shall be allowed as shall be requisite to make up for 
the de lay caused by such fraud.  49 CHAPTER  XII.—Of Bequests with Directions as to Application or Enjoyment  
138. Direction that fund be employed in particular manner following absolute bequest of same 
to or for benefit of any person. —Where a fund is beq ueathed absolutely to or for the benefit of any 
person, but the will contains a direction that it shall be applied or enjoyed in a particular manner, the 
legatee shall be entitled to receive the fund as if the will had contained no such direction.  
Illustra tion 
A sum of money is bequeathed towards purchasing a country residence for A, or to purchase an annuity for A, 
or to place A in any business. A choses to receive the legacy in money. He is entitled to do so.  
139. Direction that mode of enjoyment of absol ute bequest is to be restricted, to secure specified 
benefit for legatee. —Where a testator absolutely bequeaths a fund, so as to sever it from his own estate, 
but directs that the mode of enjoyment of it by the legatee shall be restricted so as to secure a  specified 
benefit for the legatee; if that benefit cannot be obtained for the legatee, the fund belongs to him as if the 
will had contained no such direction.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths the residue of his property to be divided equally among his daught ers, and directs that the shares 
of the daughters shall be settled upon themselves respectively for life and be paid to their children after their death. 
All the daughters die unmarried. The representatives of each daughter are entitled to her share of the  residue.  
(ii) A directs his trustees to raise a sum of money for his daughter, and he then directs that they shall invest the 
fund and pay the income arising from it to her during her life, and divide the principal among her children after her 
death. The daughter dies without having ever had a child. Her representatives are entitled to the fund.  
140. Bequest of fund for certain purposes, some of which cannot be fulfilled. —Where a testator 
does not absolutely bequeath a fund, so as to sever it from his own estate, but gives it for certain purposes, 
and part of those purposes cannot be fulfilled, the fund, or so much of it as has not been exhausted upon 
the objects contemplated by the will, remains a part of the estate of the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A dir ects that his trustees shall invest a sum of money in a particular way, and shall pay the interest to his son 
for life, and at his death shall divide the principal among his children. The son dies without having ever had a child. 
The fund, after the son's death, belongs to the estate of the testator.  
(ii) A bequeaths the residue of his estate, to be divided equally among his daughters, with a direction that they 
are to have the interest only during their lives, and that at their decease the fund shall go to  their children. The 
daughters have no children. The fund belongs to the estate of the testator.  
CHAPTER  XIII. —Of Bequests to an Executor  
141. Legatee named as executor cannot take unless be shows intention to act as executor. —If a 
legacy is bequeathed to a person who is named an executor of the will, he shall not take the legacy, unless 
he proves the will or otherwise manifests an intention to act as executor.  
Illustration  
A legacy is given to A, who is named an executor. A orders the funeral according to the directions contained in 
the will, and dies a few days after the testator, without having proved the will. A has manifested an intention to act 
as executor.  50 CHAPTER  XIV.—Of Specific Legacies  
142. Specific legacy defined. —Where a testator be queaths to any person a specified part of his 
property, which is distinguished from all other parts of his property, the legacy is said to be specific.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B — 
“the diamond ring presented to me by C ”: 
“my gold chain ”: 
“a certain  bale of wool ”: 
“a certain piece of cloth ”: 
“all my household goods which shall be in or about my dwelling -house in M. Street, in Calcutta, at time of my death ”: 
“the sum of 1,000 rupees in a certain chest ”: 
“the debt which B owes me ”: 
“all my bills, bonds  and securities belonging to me lying in my lodgings in Calcutta ”: 
“all my furniture in my house in Calcutta ”: 
“all my goods on board a certain ship now lying in the river Hughli ”: 
“2,000 rupees which I have in the hands of C ”: 
“the money due to me on the bond of D ”: 
“my mortgage on the Rampur factory ”: 
“one-half of the money owing to me on my mortgage of Rampur factory ”: 
“1,000 rupees, being part of a debt due to me from C ”: 
“my capital stock of 1,0001 in East India Stock ”: 
“my promissory notes of the Central Government for 10,000 rupees in their 4 per cent. Loan”: 
“all such sums of money as my executors may, after my -death, receive in respect of the debt due to me from the 
insolvent firm of D and Company ”: 
“all the wine which  I may have in my cellar at the time of my death ”: 
“such of my horses as B may select ” 
“all my shares in the Imperial Bank of India ”: 
“all my shares in the Imperial Bank Of India which I may possess at the time of my death ”: 
“all the money which I have in the 51/2 per cent. loan of the Central Government ”: 
“all the Government securities I shall be  entitled to at the time of my decease ”. 
Each of these legacies is specific.  
(ii) A, having Government promissory notes for 10,000 rupees, bequeaths to his executo rs “Government promissory notes 
for 10,000 rupees in trust to sell ” for the benefit of B. The legacy is specific.  
(iii) A, having property at Benares, and also in other places, bequeaths to B all his property at Benares. The legacy is 
specific.  
(iv) A bequ eaths to B —  
his house in Calcutta:  
his zamindari of Rampur:  
histaluq of Ram nagar:  51 his lease of the indigo -factory of Salkya:  
an annuity of 500 rupees out of the rents of his zamindari of W.  
A directs his zamindari of X to be sold, and the proceeds to be invested for the benefit of B.  
Each of these bequests is specific.  
(v) A by his will charges his zamindari of Y with an annuity of 1,000 rupees to C during his life, and subject to 
this charge he bequeaths the zamindari to D. Each of these b equests is specific.  
(vi) A bequeaths a sum of money —  
to buy a house in Calcutta for B:  
to buy an estate in zilaFaridpur for B:  
to buy a diamond ring for B:  
to buy a horse for B:  
to be invested in shares in the Imperial Bank of India for B:  
to be invested  in Government securities for B.  
A bequeaths to B — 
“a diamond ring ”: 
“a horse ”: 
“10,000 rupees worth of Government securities ”: 
“an annuity of 500 rupees ”: 
“2,000 rupees to be paid in cash ”: 
“so much money as will produce 5,000 rupees four per cent. Government securities. ” 
These bequests are not specific.  
(vii) A, having property in England and property in India, bequeaths a legacy to B, and directs that it shall be 
paid out of the property which he may leave in India. He also bequeaths a legacy to C,  and directs that it shall be 
paid out of propertywhich he may leave in England. No one of these legacies is specific.  
143. Bequest of certain sum where stocks, etc., in which invested are described. —Where a 
certain sum is bequeathed, the legacy is not spe cific merely because the stock, funds or securities in 
which it is invested are described in the will.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B —  
“10,000 rupees of my funded property ”: 
“10,000 rupees of my property now invested in shares of the East Indian Railway Co mpany ”: 
“10,000 rupees, at present secured by mortgage of Rampur factory ”, 
No one of these legacies is specific.  
144. Bequest of stock where testator had, at date of will, equal or greater amount of stock of 
same kind. —Where a bequest is made in general te rms of a certain amount of any kind of stock, the 
legacy is not specific merely because the testator was, at the date of his will, possessed of stock of the 
specified kind, to an equal or greater amount than the amount bequeathed.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B 5,000 rupees five per cent. Government securities. A had at the .date of the will five per cent. 
Government securities for 5,000 rupees. The legacy is not specific.  52 145. Bequest of money where not payable until part of testator's property  disposed of in certain 
way. —A money legacy is not specific merely because the will directs its payment to be postponed until 
some part of the property of the testator has been reduced to a certain form, or remitted to a certain place.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B 10,000 rupees and directs that this legacy shall be paid as soon as A ’s property in India shall 
be realised in England. The legacy is not specific.  
146. When enumerated articles not deemed specifically bequeathed. —Where a will contains a 
bequest of the residue of the testator's property along with an enumeration of some items of property not 
previously bequeathed, the articles enumerated shall not be deemed to be specifically bequeathed.  
147. Retention, in form, of specific bequest to seve ral persons in succession. —Where property is 
specifically bequeathed to two or more persons in succession, it shall be retained in the form in which the 
testator left it, although it may be of such a nature that its value is continually decreasing.  
Illustr ations  
(i) A, having lease of a house for a term of years, fifteen of which were unexpired at the time of his death, has 
bequeathed the lease to B for his life, and after B ’s death to C. B is to enjoy the property as A left it, although, if B 
lives for fif teen years, C can take nothing under the bequest.  
(ii) A, having an annuity during the life of B, bequeaths it to C, for his life, and, after C ’ s death, to D. C is to 
enjoy the annuity as A left it, although, if B dies before D, D can take nothing under t he bequest.  
148. Sale and investment of proceeds of property bequeathed to two or more persons in 
succession. —Where property comprised in a bequest to two or more persons in succession is not 
specifically bequeathed, it shall, in the absence of any directi on to the contrary, be sold, and the proceeds 
of the sale shall be invested in such securities as the High Court may by any general rule authorise or 
direct, and the fund thus constituted shall be enjoyed by the successive legatees according to the terms o f 
the will.  
Illustration  
A, having a lease for a term of years, bequeaths all his property to B for life, and, after B ’s death to C. The lease 
must be sold, the proceeds invested as stated in this section and the annual income arising from the fund is to b e paid 
to B for life. At B ’s death the capital of the fund is to be paid to C.  
149. Where deficiency of assets to pay legacies, specific legacy not to abate with general 
legacies. —If there is a deficiency of assets to pay legacies, a specific legacy is not  liable to abate with the 
general legacies.  
CHAPTER  XV.—Of Demonstrative Legacies  
150. Demonstrative legacy defined. —Where a testator bequeaths a certain sum of money, or a 
certain quantity of any other commodity, and refers to a particular fund or stock s o as to constitute the 
same the primary fund or stock out of which payment is to be made, the legacy is said to be 
demonstrative.  
Explanation .—The distinction between a specific legacy and a demonstrative legacy consists in this, 
that—  
where specified pro perty is given to the legatee, the legacy is specific;  
where the legacy is directed to be paid out of specified property, it is demonstrative.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B 1,000 rupees, being part of a debt due to him from W. He also bequeaths to C 1,000 rupees 
to be paid out of the debt due to him from W. The legacy to B is specific, the legacy to C is demonstrative.  53 (ii) A bequeaths to B —  
“ten bushels of the corn which shall  grow in my field of Green Acre” : 
“80 chests of the indigo which shall be made at my factory of Rampur ”: 
“10,000 rupees out of my five per cent.promissory notes of the Central Government ”: 
“An annuity of 500  rupees from my funded property” : 
“1,000 rupees out of the sum of 2,000 rupees due to me by C ”: 
An annu ity, and directs it to be paid “ out of the rents arising from my taluk of Ramnagar ”. 
(iii) A bequeaths to B —  
“10,000 rupees out of my estate at Ramnagar, ” or charges it  on his estate at Ramnagar:  
“10,000 rupees, being my share of the capital em barked in a cert ain business.”  
Each of these bequests is demonstrative.  
151. Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of specific 
legacy. —Where a portion of a fund is specifically bequeathed and a legacy is directed to be paid out of 
the sa me fund, the portion specifically bequeathed shall first be paid to the legatee, and the demonstrative 
legacy shall be paid out of the residue of the fund and, so far as the residue shall be deficient, out of the 
general assets of the testator.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B 1,000 rupees, being part of a debt due to him from W. He also bequeaths to C 1,000 rupees to 
be paid out of the debt due to him from W. The debt due to A from W is only 1,500 rupees; of these 1,500 rupees, 
1,000 rupees belong to B. and 500 rupees are to be paid to C. C is also to receive 500 rupees out of the general assets 
of the testator.  
CHAPTER  XVI. —Of Ademption of Legacies  
152. Ademption explained. —If anything which has been specifically bequeathed does not belong to 
the testator at the time of his death, or has been converted into property of a different kind, the legacy is a 
deemed; that is, it cannot take effect, by reason of the subject -matter having been withdrawn from the 
operation of the will.  
Illustrations  
(i) A beq ueaths to B —  
“the di amond ring presented to me by C” : 
“my gold chain” : 
“a certain bale of wool” : 
“a certain piece of cloth ”: 
“all my household goods which shall be in or about my dwelling -house in M. Street in Calcutta, at the time 
of mydeath. ” 
A in his l ife time, —  
sells or gives away the ring:  
converts the chain into a cup:  
converts the wool into cloth:  
makes the cloth into a garment:  
takes another house into which he removes all his goods.  
Each of these legacies is adeemed.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B —  
“the sum of 1 ,000 rupees, in a certain chest” : 
“all the horses in my stable” . 54 At the death of A, no money is found in the chest, and no horses in the stable. The legacies are adeemed.  
(iii) A bequeaths to B certain bales of goods. A takes the goods with him on a voyage. The ship and goods are 
lost at sea, and A is drowned. The legacy is adeemed.  
153. Non -ademption of demonstrative legacy. —A demonstrative legacy is not adeemed by reason 
that the property on which it is charged by the will does not exist at the ti me of the death of the testator, or 
has been converted into property of a different kind, but it shall in such case be paid out of the general 
assets of the testator.  
154. Ademption of specific bequest of right to receive something from third party. —Where the 
thing specifically bequeathed is the right to receive something of value from a third party, and the testator 
himself receives it, the bequest is adeemed.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B —  
“the debt which C owes me ”: 
“2,000 rupees which I have in th e hands of D ”: 
“the money due to me on the bond of E ”: 
“my mortgage on the Rampur factory” , 
All these debts are extinguished in A ’s lifetime, some with and some without his consent. All the legacies are 
adeemed.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B his interest in certain policies of life assurance. A in his lifetime receives the amount of the 
policies. The legacy is adeemed.  
155. Ademption pro tanto  by testator ’s receipt of part of entire thing specifically bequeathed. —
The receipt by  the testator of a part of an entire thing specifically bequeathed shall operate as an 
ademption of the legacy to the extent of the sum so received.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B “the debt due to me by C ”. The debt amounts to 10,000 rupees. C pays to A 5,000 rupees the 
one-half of the debt. The legacy is revoked by ademption, so far as regards the 5,000 rupees received by A.  
156. Ademption pro tanto  by testator ’s receipt of portion of entire fund of which p ortion has 
been specically bequeathed .—If a portion of an entire fund or stock is specifically bequeathed, the 
receipt by the testator of a portion of the fund or stock shall operate as an ademption only to the extent of 
the amount so received; and the res idue of the fund or stock shall be applicable to the discharge of the 
specific legacy.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B one -half of the sum of 10,000 rupees due to him from W. A in his lifetime receives 6, 000 
rupees, part of the 10,000 rupees. The 4,000 rupee s which are due from W to A at the time of his death belong to B 
under the specific bequest.  
157. Order of payment where portion of fund specifically bequeathed to one legatee, and legacy 
charged on same fund to another, and, testator having received porti on of that fund, remainder 
insufficient to pay both legacies. —Where a portion of a fund is specifically bequeathed to one legatee, 
and a legacy charged on the same fund is bequeathed to another legatee, then, if the testator receives a 
portion of that fund, and the remainder of the fund is insufficient to pay both the specific and the 
demonstrative legacy, the specific legacy shall be paid first, and the residue (if any) of the fund shall be 
applied so far as it will extend in payment of the demonstrati ve legacy, and the rest of the demonstrative 
legacy shall be paid out of the general assets of the testator.  55 Illustration  
A bequeaths to B 1,000 rupees, part of the debt of 2,000 rupees due to him from W. He also bequeaths to C 
1,000 rupees to  be paid out of the debt due to him from W. A afterwards receives 1[500] rupees, part of that debt, 
and dies leaving only 1,500 rupees due to him from W. Of these 1,500 rupees, 1,000 rupees belong to B, and 500 
rupees are to be paid to C. C is also to rece ive 500 rupees out of the general assets of the testator.  
158. Ademption where stock, specifically bequeathed, does not exist at testator ’s death. —Where 
stock which has been specifically bequeathed does not exist at the testator's death, the legacy is adee med.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B — 
“my capital stock of 1,000 £ in East India Stock ”: 
“my promissory notes of the Central Government for 10,000 rupees in their 4 per cent. loan. ” 
A sells the stock and the notes. The legacies are adeemed.  
159. Ademption pro tanto  where stock, specifically bequeathed, exists in part only at testator's 
death. —Where stock which has been specifically bequeathed exists only in part at the testator's death, the 
legacy is adeemed so far as regards that part of the stock which has ce ased to exist.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B his 10,000 rupees in the 51/2 per cent. loan of the Central Government. A sells one -half of his 
10,000 rupees in the loan in question. One -half of the legacy is adee med. 
160. Non-ademption  of specific bequest of goods described as connected with certain place, by 
reason of removal. —A specific bequest of goods under a description connecting them with a certain 
place is not adeemed by reason that they have been removed from such place from an ytemporary cause, 
or by fraud, or without the knowled ge or sanction of the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B “all my households goods which shall be in or about my dwelling -house in Calcutta at the 
time of my death ”. The goods are removed from t he hou se to save them from fire. A dies before they arc brought 
back.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B “all my household goods which shall be in or about my dwelling -house in Calcutta at the 
time of my death ”. During A's absence upon a journey, the whole of the goods  are removed from the house. A dies 
without having sanctioned their removal.  
Neither of these legacies is adeemed.  
161. When removal of thing bequeathed does not constitute ademption. —The removal of 
thething  bequeathed from the place in which it is stated in the will to be situated does not constitute an 
ademption, where the place is only referred to in order to complete the descriptionof what the testator 
meant to bequeath.  
Illustrations  
(i)  A bequeaths to B “all the bills, bonds and other securities for money belonging to me now lying in my 
lodgings in Calcutta ”. At the time of his death these effects had been removed from his lodgings in Calcutta.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B all his furniture then in his house i n Calcutta. The testator has a house at Calcutta and 
another at Chinsurah, in which he lives alternately, being possessed of one set of furniture only which he removes 
with himself to each house. At the time of his death the furniture isin the house at Chin surah.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule , for “5,000 ”. 56 (iii) A bequeaths to B all his goods on board a certain ship then lying in the river Hugh li. The goods are 
removed by A ’s directions to a warehouse, in which they remain at the time of A's death.  
No one of these legacies is revoked by ademption.  
162. When thing bequeathed is a valuable to be received by testator from third person; and 
testator himself, or his representative, receives it. —Where the thing bequeathed is not the right to 
receive something of value from a third person, but the money or  other commodity which may be 
received from the third person by the testator himself or by his representatives, the receipt of such sum of 
money or other commodity by the testator shall not constitute an ademption; but if he mixes it up with the 
general ma ss of his property, the legacy is adeemed,  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B whatever sum may be received from his claim on C. A receives the whole of his claim on C, 
and sets it apart from the general mass of his property. The legacy is not adeemed.  
163. Chan ge by operation of law of subject of specific bequest between date of will and 
testator ’s death. —Where a thing specifically bequeathed undergoes a change between the date of the 
will and the testator's death, and the change takes place by operation of law,  or in the course of execution 
of the provisions of any legal instrument under which the thing bequeathed was held, the legacy is not 
adeemed by reason of such change.  
Illustrations  
A bequeaths to B “all the money which I have in the 51/2 per cent. loan of  the. Central Government ”.The 
securities for the 51/2 per ce nt.loan are converted during A’ s lifetime into 5 per cent. stock.  
A bequeaths to B the sum of 2,000 f invested in Consols in the names of trustees for A. The sum of 2,000 
transferred by the truste es into A ’s own name.  
A bequeaths to B the sum of 10,000 rupees in promissory notes of the Central government which he has power 
under his marriage settlement to dispose of by will. Afterwards, in A ’s lifetime, the hind is converted into Consols 
by virtue of an authority contained in the settlement.  
No one of these legacies has been adeemed.  
164. Change of subject without testator ’s knowledge. —Where a thing specifically bequeathed 
undergoes a change between the da te of the will and the testator’ s death, and the change takes place 
without the knowledge or sanction of the testator, the legacy is not adeemed.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B “all my 3 per cent. Consols ”. The Consols are, without A ’s knowledge, sold by his 
agent, and the proceeds conver ted into East India Stock. This legacy is not adeemed.  
165. Stock specifically bequeathed lent to third party on condition that it be replaced. —Where 
stock which has been specifically bequeathed is lent to a third party on condition that it shall be replac ed, 
and it is replaced accordingly, the legacy is not adeemed.  
166. Stock specifically bequeathed sold but replaced, and belonging to testator at his death. —
Where stock specifically bequeathed is sold, and an equal quantity of the same stock is afterwards 
purchased and belongs to the testator at his death, the legacy is not adeemed.  
CHAPTER  XVII —Of the payment of liabilities in respect of the subject of a bequest.  
167. Non -liability of executor to exonerate specific legatees. —(1) Where property specifically  
bequeathed is subject at the death of the testator to any pledge, lien or incumbrance created by the testator 
himself or by any person under whom he claims, then, unless a contrary intention appears by the will, the 
legatee, if he accepts the bequest, sha ll accept it subject to such pledge or incumbrance, and shall (as 
between himself and the testator ’s estate) be liable to make good the amount of such pledge or 
incumbrance,  57 (2) A contrary intention shall not be inferred from any direction which the will may contain for the 
payment of the testator's debts generally.  
Explanation .—A periodical payment in the nature of land -revenue or in the nature of rent is not such 
an incumbrance as is contemplated by this section.  
Illustrations  
A bequeaths to B the diamond ring given him by C. At A ’s death the ring is held in pawn by D to whom it has 
been pledged by A. It is the duty of A ’s executors, if the state of the testator's assets wil l allow them, to allow B to 
redeem the ring.  
A bequeaths to B a zam indari which at A's death is subject to a mortgage for 10,000 rupees; and the whole of 
the principal sum, together with interest to the amount of 1,000 rupees, is due at A's death. B, if he accepts the 
bequest, accepts it subject to this charge, and is lia ble, as between himself and A's estate, to pay the sum of 11,000 
rupees thus due.  
168. Compeletion of testator ’s title to things bequeathed to be at cost of his estate. —Where 
anything is to be done to complete the testator's title to the thing bequeathed, it is to be done at the cost of 
the testator's estate.  
Illustrations  
A, having contracted in general terms for the purchase of a piece of land at a certain price, bequeaths to B, and 
dies before he has paid the purchase -money. The purchase -money must be ma de good out of A ’s assets.  
A, having contracted for the purchase of a piece of land for a certain sum of money, one -half of which is to be 
paid down and the other half secured by mortgage of the land, bequeaths it to B, and dies before he has paid or 
secur ed any part of the purchase -money. One -half of the purchase -money must be paid out of A ’s assets.  
169. Exoneration of legatee ’s immoveable property for which land -revenue or rent payable 
periodically. —Where there is a bequest of any interest in immovable p roperty in respect of which 
payment in the nature of land -revenue or in the nature of rent has to be made periodically, the estate of the 
testator shall (as between such estate and the legatee) make good such payments or a proportion of them, 
as the case m ay be, up to the day of his death.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B a house, in respect of which 365 rupees are payable annually by way of rent. A pays his rent 
at the usual time, and dies 25 days after. A ’s estate will make good 25 rupees in respect of the r ent. 
170. Exoneration of specific legatee ’s stock in joint -stock company. —In the absence of any 
direction in the will, where there is a specific bequest of stock in a joint -stock company, if any call or 
other payment is due from the testator at the time of  his death in respect of the stock, such call or payment 
shall, as between the testator's estate and the legatee, be borne by the estate; but, if any call or other 
payment becomes due in respect of such stock after the testator's death, the same shall, as between the 
testator ’s estate and the legatee, be borne by the legatee, if he accepts the bequest.  
Illustrations  
A bequeaths to B his shares in a certain railway. At A ’s death there was due from him the sum of 100 rupees in 
respect of each share, being the  amount of a call which had been duly made, and the sum of five rupees in respect of 
each share, being the amount of interest which had accrued due in respect of the call. These payments must be borne 
by A ’s estate.  
A has agreed to take 50 shares in an intended joint -stock company, and has contracted to pay up 100 rupees in 
respect of each share, which sum must be paid before his title to the shares can be completed. A bequeaths these 
shares to B. The estate of A must make good the payments which were ne cessary to complete A ’s title.  58 (iii)A bequeaths to B his shares in a certain railway. B accepts the legacy. After A's death, a call is made in 
respect of the shares. B must pay the call.  
(iv) A bequeaths to B his shares in a joint -stock compan y. B accepts the bequest. Afterwards the affairs of the 
company are wound up, and each shareholder is called upon for contribution. The amount of the contribution must 
be borne by the legatee.  
(v) A is the owner of ten shares in a railway company. At a mee ting held during his lifetime a call is made of 
fifty rupees per share, payable by three instalments. A bequeaths his shares to B, and dies between the day fixed for 
the p ayment of the first and the day fixed for the payment of the second instalment, and w ithout having paid the first 
instalment. A ’s estate must pay the first instalment, and B, if he accepts the legacy, must pay the remaining 
instalments.  
CHAPTER  XVIII. —Of Bequests of Things described in General Terms  
171. Bequest of thing described in gener al terms. —If there is a bequest of something described in 
general terms, the executor must purchase for the legatee what may reasonably be considered to answer 
the description.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B  a pair of carriage -horses or a diamond ring. The executor must provide the legatee with 
such articles if the state of the assets will allow it.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B “my pair of carriage -horses ”. A had no carriage horses at the time of his death. The lega cy 
fails.  
CHAPTER  XIX. —Of Bequests of the Interest or Produce of a Fund  
172. Bequest of interest or produce of fund. —Where the interest or produce of a fund is 
bequeathed to any person, and the will affords no indication of an intention that the enjoyment of the 
bequest should be of limited duration, the principal, as well as the interest, shall belong to the legatee.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B the interest of his 5 per cent. promissory notes of the Central Government. There is no 
other clause in th e will affecting those securities. B is entitled to A ’s 5 per cent. promissory notes of the Central 
Government.  
(ii) A bequeaths the interest of his 51/2 per cent. promissory notes of the Central Government to B for his life, 
and after his death to C. B is  entitled to the interest of the notes during his life, and C is entitled to the notes upon B's 
death.  
(iii) A bequeaths to B the rents of his lands at X. B is entitled to the lands.  
CHAPTER XX.—Of Bequests of Annuities  
173. Annuity created by will payable  for life only unless contrary intention appears by will. —
Where an annuity is created by will, the legatee is entitled to receive it for his life only, unless a contrary 
intention appears by the will, notwithstanding that the annuity is directed to be paid  out of the property 
generally, or that a sum of money is bequeathed to be invested in the purchase of it.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B 500 rupees a year. B is entitled during his life to receive the annual sum of 500 rupees.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B the sum of 500 rupees monthly. B is entitled during his life to receive the sum of 500 
rupees every month.  
(iii) A bequeaths an annuity of 500 rupees to B for life, and on B ’s death to C. B is entitled to an annuity of 500 
rupees during his life. C, if he survives B, is entitled to an annuity of 500 rupees from B ’s death until his own death.  59 174. Period of vesting where will directs that annuity be provided out of proceeds of property, 
or out of property generally, or where money bequeathed to be invested in purchase of annuity. —
Where the will directs that an annuity shall be provided for any person out of the proceeds of property, or 
out of property generally, or where money is bequeathed to be invested in the purchase of any annuity for 
any pe rson, on the testator's death, the legacy vests in interest in the legatee, and he is entitled at his 
option to have an annuity purchased for him or to receive the money appropriated for that purpose by the 
will. 
Illustrations  
(i) A by his will directs tha t his executors shall, out of his property, purchase an annuity of 1,000 rupees  for B. 
B is entitled at his option to have an annuity of 1,000 ru pees for his life purchased for him or to  receive such a sum 
as will be sufficient for the purchase of such an annuity.  
(ii) A bequeaths a fund to B for his life, and directs that after B’s death, it shall be laid out in the purchase of an 
annuity for C. B and C survive the testator. C dies in B'S lifetime. On B ’s death the,fund belongs to the 
representative of C.  
175. Abatement of annuity. —Where an annuity is bequeathed, but the assets of the testator are not 
sufficient to pay all the legacies given by the will, the annuity shall abate in the same proportion as the 
other pecuniary legacies given by the will.  
176. W here gift of annuity and residuary gift, whole annuity to be first satisfied. —Where there is 
a gift of an annuity and a residuary gift, the whole of the annuity is to be satisfied before any part of the 
residue is paid to the residuary legatee, and, if nec essary, the capital of the testator's estate shall be applied 
for that purpose.  
CHAPTER  XXI. —Of Legacies to creditors and Portioners  
177. Creditor prima facie  entitled to legacy as well as debt. —Where a debtor bequeaths a legacy to 
his creditor, and it does not appear from the will that the legacy is meant as a satisfaction of the debt, the 
creditor shall be entitled to the legacy, as well as to the amount of the debt.  
178. Child prima fa cie entitled to legacy as well as portion. —Where a parent, who is under 
obligation by contract to provide a portion for a child, fails to do so, and afterwards bequeaths a legacy to 
the child, and does not intimate by his will that the legacy is meant as a satisfaction of the portion, the 
child shall be entitled to recei ve -the legacy, as well as the portion.  
Illustration  
A, by articles entered into in contemplation of his marriage with B covenanted that he would pay to each of the 
daughters of the intended marriage a portion of 20,000 rupees on her marriage. This covenan t having been broken. 
A bequeaths 20,000 rupees to each of the married daughters of himself and B. The legatees are entitled to the benefit 
of this bequest in addition totheir portions.  
179. No ademption by -subsequent provision for legatee. —No bequest shal l be wholly or partially 
adeemed by a subsequent provision made by settlement or otherwise for the legatee.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths 20,000 rupees to his son B. He afterwards gives to B the sum of 20,000 rupees. The legacy is 
not thereby adeemed.  
(ii) A bequeaths 40,000 rupees to B, his orphan niece whom he had brought up from her infancy. Afterwards, 
on the occasion of B ’s marriage, A settles upon her the sum of 30,000 rupees. The legacy is not thereby diminished.  
CHAPTER —XXII. —Of Election  
180. Circumstances in which ele ction takes place. —Where a person, by his will, professes to 
dispose of some thing which he has no right to dispose of, the person to whom the thing belongs shall 
elect either to confirm such disposition or to dissent from it, and , in the latter case, he shall give up any 
benefits which may have been provided for him by the will.  60 181. Devolution of interest relinq uished by owner. —An interest relinquished in the circumstances 
stated in section 180 shall devolve as if it  had not been disposed of by the will in favour of the legatee, 
subject, nevertheless, to the charge of making good to the disappointed legatee the amount or value of the 
gift attempted to be given to him by the will.  
182. Testator ’s belief as to his owner ship immaterial. —The provisions of sections 180 and 181 
apply whether the testator does or does not believe that which he professes to dispose of by his will to be 
his own.  
Illustrations  
(i) The farm of Sultanpur was the property of C. A bequeathed it to B , giving a legacy of 1,000 rupees to C. C 
has elected to retain his farm of Sultanpur, which is worth 800 rupees. C forfeits his legacy of 1,000 rupees, of 
which 800 rupees goes to B, and the remaining 200 rupees falls into the residuary bequest, or devolv es according to 
the rules of intestate succession, as the case may be.  
(ii) A bequeaths an estate to B in case B ’s elder brother (who is married and has children) shall leave no issue 
living at his death. A also bequeaths to C a jewel, which belongs to B. B must elect to give up the jewel or to lose 
the estate.  
(iii) A bequeaths to B 1,000 rupees, and to C an estate which will, under a settlement, belong to B if his elder 
brother (who is married and has children) shall leave no issue living at his death. B must elect to give up the estate 
or to lose the legacy.  
(iv) A, a person of the age of 18, domiciled in 1[India] but owning real property in England, to which C is heir at 
law, bequeaths a legacy to C and, subject thereto, devises and bequeaths to B “all my property whatsoever and 
wheresoever, ” and dies under 21. The real property in England does not pass by the will. C may claim his legacy 
without giving up the real pr operty in England.  
183. Bequest for man ’s benefit how regarded for purpose of electi on.—A bequest for a person's 
benefit is, for the purpose of election, the same thing as a bequest made to himself.  
Illustration  
The farm of SultanpurKhurd being the property of B, A bequeathed it to C: and bequeathed another farm called 
SultanpurBuzurg to his own executors with a direction that it should be sold and the proceeds applied in payment of 
B's debts. B must elect whether he will abide by the will, or keep his farm of SultanpurKhurd in opposition to it.  
184. Person deriving benefit indirectly not put to election. —A person taking .no benefit directly 
under a will, but deriving a benefit under it indirectly, is not put to his election.  
Illustration  
The lands of Sultanpur are settled upon C for life, and after his death upon D, his only child. A beque aths the 
lands of Sultanpur to B, and 1,000 rupees to C. C dies intestate shortly after the testator, and without having made 
any election. D takes out administration to C, and as administrator elects on behalf of C ’s estate to take under the 
will. In that  capacity he receives the legacy of 1,000 rupees and accounts to B for the rents of the lands of Sultanpur 
which accrued after the death of the testator and before the death of C. In his individual character he ratains the 
lands of Sultanpur in opposition to the will.  
185. Person taking in individual capacity under will may In other character elect to take in 
opposition. —A person who in his individual capacity takes a benefit under a will may, in another 
character, elect to take in opposition to the will.  
Illustration  
The estate of Sultanpur is settled upon A for life, and after his death, upon B. A leaves the estate of Sultanpur to 
D, and 2,000 rupees to B, and 1,000 rupees to C, who is B ’s only child. B dies intestate, shortly after the testator, 
without having made an election. C takes out administration to B, and as administrator elects to keep the estate of 
Sultanpur in opposition to the will, and to relinquish the legacy of 2,000 rupees. C may do this, and yet claim his 
legacy of 1,000 rupees under the  will. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for “the States ”. 61 186. Exception to provisions of last six sections. —Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 
180 to 185, where a particular gift is expressed in the will to be in lieu of something belonging to the 
legatee, which is also in terms  disposed of by the will, then, if the legatee claims that thing, he must 
relinquish the particular gift, but he is not bound to relinquish any other benefit given to him by the will.  
Illustration  
Under A ’s marriage -settlement his wife is entitled, if she survives him, to the enjoyment of the estate of 
Sultanpur during her life. A by his will bequeaths to his wife an annuity of 200 rupees during her life, in lieu of her 
interest in the estate of Sultanpur, which estate he bequeaths to his son. He also gives  his wife a legacy of 1,000 
rupees. The widow elects to take what she is entitled to under the settlement. She is bound to relinquish the annuity 
but not the legacy of 1,000 rupees.  
187. When acceptance of benefit given by will constitutes election to take  under will. —
Acceptance of a benefit given by a will constitutes an election by the legatee to take under the will, if he 
had knowledge of his right to elect and of those circumstances which would influence the judgment of a 
reasonable man in making an ele ction, or if he waives inquiry into the circumstances.  
Illustrations  
(i) A is owner of an estate called SultanpurKhurd, and has a life interest in anotuer estate called 
SultanpurBuzurg to which upon his death his son B will be absolutely entitled. The will  of A gives the estate of 
SultanpurKhurd to B, and the estate of SultanpurBuzurg to C. B, in ignorance of his own right to the estate of. 
SultanpurBuzurg, allows C to take possession of it, and enters into possession of the estate of SultanpurKhurd. B has 
not confirmed the bequest of SultanpurBuzurg to C.  
(ii) B, the eldest son of A, is the possessor of an estate called Sultanpur. A bequeaths Sultanpur to C, and to B 
the residue of A ’s property. B having been informed by A ’s executors that the residue will amount to 5,000 rupees, 
allows C to take possession of Sultanpur. He afterwards discovers that the residue does not amount to more than 500 
rupees. B has not confirmed the bequest of the estate of Sultanpur to C.  
188. Circ umstances in which knowledge or waiver is presumed or inferred. —(1) Such 
knowledge or waiver of inquiry shall, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be presumed if the 
legatee has enjoyed for two years the benefits provided for him by the will withou t doing any act to 
express dissent.  
(2) Such knowledge or. waiver of inquiry may be inferred from any act of the legatee which renders it 
impossible to place the persons interested in the subject -matter of the bequest in the same condition as if 
such act h ad not been done.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B an estate to which C is entitled, and to C a coal -mine. C takes possession of the mine and 
exhausts it. He has thereby confirmed the bequest of the estate to B.  
189. When testator ’s representatives may call u pon legatee to elect. —If the legatee does not, 
within one year after the death of the testator, signify to the testator ’s representatives his intention to 
confirm or to dissent from the will, the representatives shall, upon the expiration of that period, r equire 
him to make his election; and; if he does not comply with such requisition within a reasonable time after 
he has received it, he shall be deemed to have elected to confirm the will.  
190. Postponement of election in case of disability. —In case of dis ability the election shall be 
postponed until the disability ceases, or until the election is made by some competent authority.  
CHAPTER  XXIII. —Of Gifts in Contemplation of Death  
191. Property transferable by gift made in contemplation of death. —(1) A man m ay dispose, by 
gift made in contemplation of death, of any moveable property which he could dispose of by will.  
(2) A gift is said to be made in contemplation of death where a man, who is ill and expects to die 
shortly of his illness, delivers, to another the possession: of any moveable property to keep as a gift in 
case the donor shall die of that illness.  62 (3) Such a gift may be resumed by the giver; and shall not take effect if he recovers from the illness 
during which it was made; nor if he survives the person to whom it was made.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, being il l, and in expectation of death, delivers to B, to be retained by him in case of A ’s death, —  
a watch:  
a bond granted by C to A:  
a bank -note:  
a promissory note of the Central Government endorsed in blank:  
a bill of exchange endorsed in blank:  
certain mortgage -deeds.  
A dies of the illness during which he delivered these articles.  
B is entitled to —  
the watch:  
the debt secured by C ’s bond:  
the bank -note:  
the promissory note of the Central G overnment :  
the bill of exchange:  
the money secured by the mortgage -deeds.  
(ii) A, being ill, and in expectation of death, delivers to B the key of a trunk or the key of a warehouse in which 
goods of bulk belonging to A are deposited, with the intention of  giving him the control over the contents of the 
trunk, or over the deposited goods, and desires him to keep them in case of A ’s death. A dies of the illness during 
which he delivered these articles. B is entitled to the trunk and its contents or to A ’s goods of bulk in the warehouse.  
(iii) A, being ill, and in expectation of death, puts aside certain articles in separate parcels and marks upon the 
parcels respectively the names of B and C. The parcels are not delivered during the life of A. A, dies of the illness 
during which he set aside the parcels. B and C are not entitled to the contents of the parcels.  
PART VII 
PROTECTION OF PROPERTY OF DECEASED  
192. Person claiming right by succession to property of deceased may apply for relief against 
wrongful posse ssion. —(1) If any person dies leaving property, moveable or immoveable, any person 
claiming a right by succession thereto, or to any portion thereof, may make application to the District 
Judge of the district where any part of the property is found or situ ate for relief, either after actual 
possession has been taken by another person, or when forcible means of seizing possession are 
apprehended.  
(2) Any agent, relative or near friends, or the Court of Wards in cases within their cognizance, may, 
in the event of any minor, or any disqualified or absent person being entitled by succession to such 
property as aforesaid, make the like application for relief.  
193. Inquiry made by Judge. —The District Judge to whom such application is made shall, in the 
first p lace, examine the applicant on oath, and may make such further inquiry, if any, as he thinks 
necessary as to whether there is sufficient ground for believing that the party in possession or taking 
forcible means for seizing possession has no lawful title, and that the applicant, or the person on whose 
behalf he applies is really entitled and is likely to be materially prejudiced if left to the ordinary remedy of 
a suit, and that the application is made bona fide.  
194. Procedure. —If the District Judge is satisfied that there is sufficient ground for believing as 
aforesaid but not otherwise, he shall summon the party complained of, and give notice of vacant or 
disturbed possession by publication, and, after the expiration of a reasonable time, shall determi ne 
summarily the right to possession (subject to a suit as hereinafter provided) and shall deliver possession 
accordingly.  63 Provided that the Judge shall have the power to appoint an officer who shall take an inventory of 
effects, and seal or o therwise secure the same, upon being applied to for the purpose, without delay, 
whether he shall have concluded the inquiry necessary for summoning the party complained of or not.  
195. Appointment of curator pending determination of proceeding. —If it furth er appears upon 
such inquiry as aforesaid that danger is to be apprehended of the misappropriation or waste of the 
property before the summary proceeding can be determined, and that the delay in obtaining security from 
the party in possession or the insuff iciency thereof is likely to expose the party out of possession to 
considerable risk, provided he is the lawful owner, the District Judge may appoint one or more curators 
whose authority shall continue according to the terms of his or their respective appo intment, and in no 
case beyond the determination of the summary proceeding and the confirmation or delivery of possession 
in the consequence thereof:  
Provided that, in the case of land, the Judge may delegate to the Collector, or to any officer 
subordinate  to the Collector, the powers of a curator:  
Provided, further, that every appointment of a curator in respect of any property shall be duly 
published.  
196. Powers conferrable on curator. —The District Judge may authorise the curator to take 
possession of th e property either generally, or until security is given by the party in possession, or until 
inventories of the property have been made, or for any other purpose necessary for securing the property 
from misappropriation or waste by the party in possession:  
Provided that it shall be in the discretion of the Judge to allow the party in possession to continue in 
such possession on giving security or not, and any continuance in possession shall be subject to such 
orders as the Judge may issue touching inventori es, or the securing of deeds or other effects.  
197. Prohibition of exercise of certain powers by curators. —(1) Where a certificate has been 
granted under Part X or under the Seccession Certificate Act, 18891 (7 of 1 889), or a grant of probate or 
letters of  admin istration has been made, a curator appointed under this Part shall not exercise any 
authority lawfully belonging to the holder of the certificate or to the executor or administrator.  
(2) Payment of debts, etc., to curator. —All persons who have paid d ebts or rents to a curator 
authorised by a Court to receive them shall be indemnified, and the curator shall be responsible for the 
payment thereof to the person who has obtained the certificate, probate or letters of administration, as the 
case may be.  
198. Curator to give security and may receive remuneration. —(1) The District Judge shall take 
from the curator security for the faithful discharge of his trust, and for rendering, satisfactory accounts of 
the same as hereinafter provided, and may authorise h im to receive out of the property such remuneration, 
in no case exceeding five per centum on the moveable property and on the annual profits of the 
immoveable property, as the District Judge thinks reasonable.  
(2) All surplus money realized by the curator shall be paid into Court, and invested in public 
securities for the benefit of the persons entitled thereto upon adjudication of the summary proceeding.  
(3) Security shall be required from the curator with all reasonable despatch, and where it is 
practicab le, shall be taken generally to answer all cases for which the person may be afterwards appointed 
curator; but no delay in the taking of security shall prevent the Judge from immediately investing the 
curator with the powers of his office.  
                                                      
1. Rep. partly by Act 39 of 1925, and finally by Act 1 of 1938.  64 199. Report from Collector where estate includes revenue paying land. —(1) Where the estate of 
the deceased person consists wholly or in part of land paying revenue to Government, in all matters 
regarding the propriety of summoning the party in possession, o f appointing a curator, or of nominating 
individuals to that appointment, the District Judge shall demand a report from the Collector, and the 
Collector shall thereupon furnish the same:  
Provided that in cases of urgency the Judge may proceed, in the first  instance, without such report.  
(2) The Judge shall not be obliged to act in conformity with any such report, but, in case of his acting 
otherwise than according to such report, he shall immediately forward a statement of his reasons to the 
High Court, and  the High Court, if it is dissatisfied with such reasons, shall direct the Judge to proceed 
conformably to the report of the Collector.  
200. Institution and defence of suits. —The curator shall be subject to all orders of the District Judge 
regarding the in stitution or the defence of suits, and all suits may be instituted or defended in the name of 
the curator on behalf of the estate:  
Provided that an express authority shall be requisite in the order of the curator ’s appointment for the 
collection of debts o r rents; but such express authority shall enable the curator to give a full acquittance 
for any sums of money received by virtue thereof.  
201. Allowances to apparent owners pending custody by curator. —Pending the custody of the 
property by the curator, the  District Judge may make such allowances to parties having a prima facie  right 
thereto as upon a summary investigation of the right and circumstances of the parties interested he 
considers necessary, and may, at his discretion, take security for the repaym ent thereof with interest, in 
the event of the party being found, upon the adjudication of the summary proceeding, not to be entitled 
thereto.  
202. Accounts to be filed by curator. —The curator shall file monthly accounts in abstract, and shall, 
on the expi ry of each period of three months, if his administration lasts so long, and, upon giving up the 
possession of the property, file a detailed account of his administration to the satisfaction of the District 
Judge.  
203. Inspection of accounts and right of in terested party to keep duplicate. —(1) The accounts of 
the curator shall be open to the inspection of all parties interested; and it shall be competent for any such 
interested party to appoint a separate person to keep a duplicate account of all receipts an d payments by 
the curator.  
(2) If it is found that the accounts of the curator are in arrear, or that they are erroneous or incomplete, 
or if the curator does not produce them whenever he is ordered to do so by the District Judge, he shall be 
punishable wi th fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for every such default.  
204. Bar to appointment of second curator for same property. —If the Judge of any district has 
appointed a curator; in respect to the whole of the property of a deceased person, such appointm ent shall 
preclude the Judge of any other district within the same State from appointing any other curator, but the 
appointment of a curator in respect of a portion of the property of the deceased shall not preclude the 
appointment within the same State of  another curator in respect of the residue or any portion thereof  
Provided that no Judge shall appoint curator or entertain a summary proceeding in respect of property 
which is the subject of a summary proceeding previously instituted under this Part before another Judge:  
Provided, further, that if two or more curators are appointed by different Judges for several parts of an 
estate, the High Court may make such order as it thinks fit for the appointment of one curator of the 
whole property.  
205. Limit ation of time for application for curator. —An application under this Part to the District 
Judge must be made within six months of the death of the proprietor whose property is claimed by right in 
succession.  65 206. Bar to enforcement of Part aga inst public se ttlement or legal directions by                    
deceased. —Nothing in this Part shall be deemed to authorise the contravention of any public act of 
settlement or of any legal directions given by a deceased proprietor of any property for the  possession of 
his property after his decease in the event of minority or otherwise, and, in every such case, as soon as the 
Judge having jurisdiction over the property of a deceased person is satisfied of the existence of such 
directions, he shall give ef fect thereto.  
207. Court of Wards to be made curator in case of minors having property subject to its 
jurisdiction. —Nothing in this Part shall be deemed to authorise any disturbance of the possession of a 
Court of Wards of any property; and in case a minor , or other disqualified person whose pro perty is 
subject to the Court o f Wards, is the party on whose behalf application is made under this Part, the 
District Judge, if he determines to summon the party in possession and to appoint a curator, shall invest 
the Court of Wards with the curatorship of the estate pending the proceeding without taking security as 
aforesaid; and if the minor or other disqualified person, upon the adjudication of the summary proceeding, 
appears to be entitled to the property, posse ssion shall be delivered to the Court of Wards.  
208. Saving of right to bring suit. —Nothing contained in this Part shall be any impediment to the 
bringing of a suit either by the party whose application may have been rejected before or after the 
summoning of the party in possession, or by the party who may have been evicted from the possession 
under this Part.  
209. Effect of decision of summary proceeding. —The decision of a District Judge in a summary 
proceeding under this Part shall have no other effect th an that of settling the actual possession; but for this 
purpose it shall be final, and shall not be subject to any appeal or review.  
210. Appointment of public curators. —The State Government may appoint public curators for any 
district or number of distric ts; and the District Judge having jurisdiction shall nominate such public 
curators in all cases where the choice of a curator is left discretionary with him under this Part.  
PART VIII  
REPRESENTATIVE  TITLE TO PROPERTY OF DECEASED ON SUCCESSION  
211. Character and property of executor or administrator as such. —(1) The executor or 
administrator, as the case may be, of a deceased person is his legal representative for all purposes, and all 
the property of the deceased person vests in - him as such.  
(2) Wh en the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Budhist, Sikh, 1[Jaina or Parsi] or an exempted 
person, nothing herein contained shall vest in an executor or administrator any property of the deceased 
person which would otherwise have passed by survivorship to so me other person.  
212. Right to intestate ’s property. —(1) No right to any part of the property of a person who has 
died intestate can be established in any Court of Justice, unless letters of administration have first been 
granted by a Court of competent ju risdiction.  
(2) This section shall not apply in the case of the intestacy of a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, 
Jaina, 2[Indian Christian or Parsi].  
213. Right as executor or legatee when established. —(1) No right as executor or legatee can be 
establishe d in any Court of Justice, unless a Court of competent jurisdiction in 3[India] has granted 
probate of the will under which the right is claimed, or has granted letters of administration with the will 
or with a copy of an authenticated copy of the will ann exed.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1962, s. 2, for “or Jaina ”. 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “or Indian Christian ”. 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for “the States ”. 66 1[(2) This  section shall not apply in the case of wills made by Muhammadans  2[or Indian Christians] , 
and shall only apply —  
(i) in the case of wills made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina  where such wills are of the 
classes specified in clauses (a) and (b) of section 57; and  
(ii) in the case of wills made by any Parsi dying, after the commencement of the Indian 
Succession (Amendment) Act, 1962 (16 of 1962), where such wills are made within  the local limits 
of the 3[ordinary -original civil jurisdiction] of the High Courts at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, and 
where such wills are made outside those limits, in so far as they relate to immovable property situate 
within those limits.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karela .— 
Amendment of section 213 .—In sub -section (2) of section 213 of the Indian Succession Act, 
1925 (Central Act 39 of 1925),  after the word ‘Muhammadans’, the words ‘or Indian Christians’  shall 
be inserted.  
[Vide Kerala Act 1 of 1997 , sec. 2]. 
214. Proof of representative title a condition precedent to recovery through the Courts of debts 
from debtors of deceased persons. —(1) No Court shall —  
(a) pass a decree against a debtor of a deceased person for payment of his debt to a person 
claiming  on succession to be entitled to the effects of the deceased person or to any part thereof, or  
(b) proceed, upon an application of a person claiming to be so entitled, to execute against such a 
debtor a decree or order for the payment of his debt,  
except o n the production, by the person so claiming of —  
(i) a probate or letters of administration evidencing the grant to him of administration to the estate 
of the deceased, or  
(ii) a certificate granted under section 31 or section 32 of the Administrator Gener al’s Act, 1913 
(3 of 1913), and having the debt mentioned therein, or  
(iii) a succession certificate granted under Part X and having the debt specified therein, or  
(iv) a certificate granted under the Succession Certificate Act, 18894 (7 of 1889), or  
(v) a certificate granted under Bombay Regulation No. VIII of 1827, and, if granted after the first 
day of May, 1889, having the debt specified therein.  
(2) The word “debt” in sub -section ( 1) includes any debt except rent, revenue or profits payable in 
respect of land used for agricultural purposes.  
215. Effection certificate of subsequent probate or letters of administration. —(1) A grant of 
probate or letters of administration in respect of an estate shall be deemed to supersede any certificate 
previously grant ed under Part X or under the Succession Certificate Act, 18894 (7 of 1889) or Bombay 
Regulation No. VIII of 1827, in respect of any debts or securities included in the estate.  
(2) When at the time of the grant of the probate or letters any suit or other pr oceeding instituted by the 
holder of any such certificate regarding any such debt or security is pending, the person to whom the 
grant is made shall, on applying to the Court in which the suit or proceeding is pending, be entitled to take 
the place of the holder of the certificate in the suit or proceeding:  
Provided that, when any certificate is superseded under this section, all payments made to the holder 
of such certificate in ignorance of such supersession shall be held good against claims under the pro bate 
or letters of administration.  
216. Grantee of probate or administration alone to sue, etc., until same revoked. —After any 
grant of probate or letters of administration, no other than the person to whom the same may have been 
granted shall have power t o sue or prosecute any suit, or otherwise act as representative of the  deceased, 
throughout the State in which the same may have been granted, until such probate or letters of 
administration has or have been recalled or revoked.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1962, s. 4, for sub -section ( 2). 
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -5-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “ordinary civil jurisdiction”.  
4. Rep. partly by Act 39 of 1925, and finally by Act 1 of 1938.  67 PART IX  
PROBATE , LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF ASSETS OF  DECEASED  
217. Application of Part. —Save as otherwise provided by this Act or by any other law for the time 
being in force, all grants of probate and letters of administration with the will a nnexed and the 
administration of the assets of the deceased in cases of intestate succession shall be made or carried out, 
as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this Part.  
CHAPTER  I.—Of Grant of Probate and Letters of Administration  
218. To whom administration may be granted, where deceased is a Hindu, Muhammadan, 
Budhist, Sikh, Jaina or exempted person. —(1) If the deceased has died intestate and was a Hindu, 
Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person, administration of his  estate may be 
granted to any person who, according to the rules for the distribution of the estate applicable in the case of 
such deceased, would be entitled to the whole or any part of such deceased's estate.  
(2) When several such persons apply for such administration, it shall be in the discretion of the Court 
to grant it to any one or more of them.  
(3) When no such person applies, it may be granted to a creditor of the deceased.  
219. Where deceased is not a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or ex empted 
person. —If the deceased has died intestate and was not a person belonging to any of the classes referred 
to in section 218, those who are connected with him, either by marriage or by consanguinity, are entitled 
to obtain letters of administration of  his estate and effects in the order and according to the rules 
hereinafter stated, namely: —  
(a) If the deceased has left a widow, administration shall be granted to the widow, unless the 
Court sees cause to exclude her, either on the ground of some perso nal disqualification, or because 
she has no interest in the estate of the deceased.  
Illustrations  
(i) The widow is a lunatic or has committed adultery or has been barred by her marriage  settlement of all 
interest in  her husband ’s estate. There is cause for  excluding her from the  administration.  
(ii) The widow has married again since the decease of her husband. This is not good cause for her exclusion.  
(b) If the Judge thinks proper, he may associate any person or persons with the widow in the 
administration  who would be entitled solely to the administration if there were no widow.  
(c) If there is no widow, or if the Court sees cause to exclude the widow, it shall commit the 
administration to the person or persons who would be beneficially entitled to the est ate according to 
the rules for the distribution of an intestate ’s estate:  
Provided that, when the mother of the deceased is one of the class of persons so entitled, she shall 
be solely entitled to administration.  
(d) Those who stand in -equal degree of kin dred to the deceased are equally entitled to 
administration.  
(e) The husband surviving his wife has the same right of administration of her estate as the widow 
has in respect of the estate of her husband.  
(f) When there is no person connected with the dece ased by marriage or consanguinity who is 
entitled to letters of administration and willing to act, they may be granted to a creditor.  68 (g) Where  the deceased has left property in 1[India], letters of administration shall be granted 
according to  the foregoing rules, notwithstanding that he had his domicile in a country in which the law 
relating to testate and intestate succession differs from the law of 1[India].  
220. Effect of letters of administration. —Letters of administration entitle the administrator to all 
rights belonging to the intestate as effectually as if the administration had been granted at the moment 
after his death.  
221. Acts not validated by administration. —Letters of administration do not render valid any 
intermediate acts of  the administrato r tending to the diminution or damage of the intestate's estate.  
222. Probate only to appointed executor .—(1) Probate shall be granted only to an executor 
appointed by the will.  
(2) The appointment may be expressed or by necessary implicat ion. 
Illustrations  
(i) A wills that C be his executor if B will not. B is appointed executor by implication.  
(ii) A gives a legacy to B and several legacies to other persons, among the rest to his daughter -in-law C, and 
adds “but should the within -named C be not living I do constitute and appoint B my whole and sole executrix ”. C is 
appointed executrix by implication.  
(iii) A appoints several persons executors of his will and codicils ’ and his nephew residuary legatee, and in 
another codicil are these words, —“I appoint my nephew my residuary legatee to discharge all lawful demands 
against my will and codicils signed of different dates ”. The nephew is appointed an executor by implication . 
223. Persons to whom probate cannot be granted. —Probate cannot be granted to any person who 
is a minor or is of unsound mind 2[nor to any association of individuals unless it is a company which 
satisfies the conditions prescribed by rules to be made 3[,by notification in the Official Gazette] by the 
4[State Government] in this behalf].  
224. Grant of probate to several executors simultaneously or at different times. —When several 
executors are appointed, probate may be granted to them all simultaneously or at different times.  
Illustration  
A is an executor of B's will by express appointment and C an executor of it by implication. Probate may be 
granted to A and C at the same time or to A first and then to C, or to C first and then to A.  
225. Separate probate of codicil discovered after grant of probate. —(1) If a codicil is discovered 
after the grant of probate, a separate probate of that codicil may be granted to the executor, if it in no way 
repeals the appointment of executors made by the will.  
(2) If differ ent executors are appointed by the codicil, the probate of the will shall be revoked, and a 
new probate granted of the will and the codicil together.  
226. Accrual of representation to surviving executor. —When probate has been granted to several 
executors, and one of them dies, the entire representation of the testator accrues to the surviving executor 
or executors.  
227. Effect of probate. —Probate of a will when granted establishes the will from the death of the 
testator, and renders valid all intermediate a cts of the executor as such.  
228. Administration, with copy annexed, of authenticated copy of will proved abroad. —When a  
will has been proved and deposited in a Court of competent jurisdiction situated beyond the limits of the 
State, whether within or beyo nd the limits of 5[India], and a properly authenticated copy of the will is 
produced, letters of administration may be granted with a copy of such copy annexed.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States."  
2. Added by Act 17 of 1931, s. 2. The words "nor, unless the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an 
exempted person, to a married woman without the previous con sent of her husband" which originally occurred at the end of 
this section had been omitted by Act 18 of 1927, s. 2.  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
4. The words "G.G. in C.”  have been successively amended by the A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
5. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for "His Majesty's Domination".  69 229. Grant  of administration where executor has not renounced .—When a person appointed an 
execu tor has not renounced the executorship, letters of administration shall not be granted to any other 
person until a citation has been issued, calling upon the executor to accept or renounce his executorship:  
Provided that, when one or more of several execut ors have proved a will, the Court may, on the death 
of the survivor of those who have proved, grant letters of administration without citing those who have 
not proved.  
230. Form and effect of renunciation of executorship. —The renunciation may be made orally in 
the presence of the Judge, or by a writing signed by the person renouncing, and when made shall preclude 
him from ever thereafter applying for probate of the will appointing him executor.  
231. Procedure where executor renounces or fails to accept  within time limited. —If an executor 
renounces or fails to accept an executorship within the time limited for the acceptance or refusal thereof, 
the will may be proved and letters of administration, with a copy of the will annexed, may be granted to 
the pe rson who would be entitled to administration in case of intestacy.  
232. Grant of administration to universal or residuary legatees. —When — 
(a) the deceased has made a will, but has not appointed an executor, or  
(b) the deceased has appointed an executor who  is legally incapable or refuses to act, or who has 
died before the testator or before he has proved the will, or  
(c) the executor dies after having proved the will, but before he has administered all the estate of 
the deceased,  
an universal or a residuary  legatee may be admitted to prove the will, and letters of administration with 
the will annexed may be granted to him of the whole estate, or of so much thereof as may be 
unadministered.  
233. Right to administration of representative of deceased residuary legatee. —When a residuary 
legatee who has a beneficial interest survives the testator, but dies before the estate has been fully 
administered, his representative has the same right to administration with the will annexed as such 
residuary legatee.  
234. Gra nt of administration where no executor, nor residuary legatee nor representative of 
such legatee. —When there is no executor and no residuary legatee or representative of a residuary 
legatee, or he declines or is incapable to act, or cannot be found, the pe rson or persons who would be 
entitled to the administration of the estate of the deceased if he had died intestate, or any other legatee 
having a beneficial interest, or a creditor, may be admitted to prove the will, and letters of administration 
may be gr anted to him or them accordingly.  
235. Citation before grant of administration to legatee other than universal or residuary. —
Letters of administration with the will annexed shall not be granted to any legatee other than an universal 
or a residuary legatee,  until a citation has been issued and published in the manner hereinafter mentioned, 
calling on the next -of-kin to accept or refuse letters of administration.  
236. To whom administration may not be granted. —Letters of administration cannot be granted to 
any person who is a minor or is of unsound mind, 1[nor to any association of individuals unless it is a 
company which satisfies the conditions  prescribed by rules to be made 2[by notification in the Official 
Gazette,] by the 3[State Government] in this behal f]. 
                                                      
1. Added by Act 17 of 1931, s. 2. The words "nor, unless the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, or Ja ina or 
an exempted person, to a married woman without the previous consent of her husband" which originally occurred at the end of 
this section had been omitted by Act 18 of 1927, s. 2.  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s.2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
3. The wor ds “G.G. in C. ”have been successively amended by the A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  70 1[236A. Laying  of rules before State Legislature. —Every rule made by the State Government under 
section 223 and section 236 shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the State Legislature.] 
CHAPTER  II—Of Limited Grants  
Grants  limited in duration  
237. Probate of copy or draft of lost will. —When a will has been lost or mislaid since the 
testator's death, or has been destroyed by wrong or accident and not by any act of the testator, and 
a copy or the draft of the will has been pr eserved, probate may .be granted of such copy or draft, 
limited until the original or a properly authenticated copy of it is produced.  
238. Probate of contents or lost of destroyed will. —When a will has been lost or destroyed and no 
copy has been made nor the draft preserved, probate may be granted of its contents if they can be 
established by evidence.  
239. Probate of copy where original exists. —When the will is in the possession of a person residing 
out of the State in which application for probate is mad e, who has refused or neglected to deliver it up, 
but a copy has been transmitted to the executor, and it is necessary for the interests of the estate that 
probate should be granted without waiting for the arrival of the original, probate may be granted of  the 
copy so transmitted, limited until the will or an authenticated copy of it is produced.  
240. Administration until will produced. —Where no will of the deceased is forthcoming, but there 
is reason to believe that there is a will in existence, letters of  administration may be granted, limited until 
the will or an authenticated copy of it is produced.  
Grants for the use and benefit of others having right  
241. Administration , with will annexed, to attorney of absent executor. —When any executor 
is absent fro m the State in which application is made, and there is no executor within the State 
willing to act, letters of administration, with the will annexed, may be granted to the attorney or 
agent of the absent executor, for the use and benefit of his principal, limited until he shall obtain 
probate or letters of administration granted to himself.  
242. Administration, with will annexed to attorney of a absent person who, if present, would be 
entitled to administer. —When any pers on to whom, if present, letters of a dministration, with the will 
annexed, might be granted, is absent from the State, letters of administration, with the will annexed may 
be granted to his attorney or agent, limited as mentioned in section .241.  
243. Administration to attorney of absent pers on entitled to administer in case of intestacy. —
When a person entitled to administration in case of intestacy is absent from the State, and no person 
equally entitled is willing to act, letters of administration may be granted to the attorney or agent of t he 
absent person, limited as mentioned in section 241.  
244. Administration during minority of sole executor or residuary legatee. —When a minor is 
sole executor or sole residuary legatee, letters of administration, with the will annexed, may be granted to 
the legal guardian of such minor or to such other person as the Court may think fit until the minor has 
attained his majority at which period, and not before, probate of the will shall be granted to him.  
245. Administration during minority of several executors or residuary legatee. —When there are 
two or more minor executors and no executor who has attained majority, or two or more residuary 
legatees and no residuary legatee who has attained majority, the grant shall be limited until one of them 
shall h ave attained his majority.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  71 246. Administration for use and benefit of lunatic or minor. —If a sole executor or a sole universal 
or residuary legatee, or a person who would be solely entitled to the estate of the intestate according to the 
rule for the distribution of intestates' estates applicable in the case of the deceased, is a minor or lun atic, 
letters of administration with or without the will annexed, as the case may be, shall be granted to the 
person to whom the care ii)f his estate has been committed by competent authority, or, if there is no such 
person, to such other peron as the Cour t may think fit to appoint, for the use and benefit of the minor or 
lunatic until he attains majority or becomes of sound mind, as the case may be.  
247. Administration pendente li te.—Pending any suit touching the validity of the will of a deceased 
person o r for obtaining or revoking any probate or any grant of letters of administration, the Court may 
appoint an administrator of the estate of such deceased person, who shall have all the rights and powers of 
a general administrator, other than the right of di stributing such estate, and every suet. administrator shall 
be subject to the immediate control of the Court and shall act under its direction.  
Grants for special purposes  
248. Probate limited to purpose specified in will.—If an executorappointed for any l imited  
purpose specified in the will, the probate shall be limited to that purpose, and if he should appoint an 
attorney or agent to take administration on his behalf, the letters of administration, with the will annexed, 
shall be limited accordingly.  
249. Administration, with will annexed, limited to particular purpose. —If an executor appointed 
generally gives an authority to an attorney or agent to prove a will on his behalf, and the authority is 
limited to a particular purpose, the letters of administra tion, with the will annexed, shall be limited 
accordingly.  
250. Administration limited to property in which person has beneficial interest. —Where a 
person dies, leaving property of which he was the sole or surviving trustee, or in which he had no 
beneficia l interest on his own account, and leaves no general representative, or one who is unable or 
unwilling to act as such, letters of administration, limited to such property, may be granted to the 
beneficiary, or to some other person on his behalf.  
251. Admin istration limited to suit. —When it is necessary that the representative of a person 
deceased be made a party to a pending suit, and the executor, or person entitled to administration is 
unable or unwilling to act, letters of administration may be granted t o the nominee of a party in such suit, 
limited for the purpose of representing the deceased in the said suit, or in any other cause or suit which 
may be commenced in the same or in any other Court between the parties, or any other parties, touching 
the mat ters at issue in the said cause or suit, and until a final decree shall be made therein and carried into 
complete execution.  
252. Administration limited to purpose of becoming party to suit to be brought against 
administrator. —If, at the expiration of twel ve months from the date of any probate or letters of 
administration, the executor or administrator to whom the same has been granted is absent from the State 
within which the Court which has granted the probate or letters of administration exercises jurisd iction, 
the Court may grant, to any person whom it may think fit, letters of administration limited to the purpose 
of becoming and being made a party to a suit to be brought against the executor or administrator, and 
carrying the decree which may be made t herein into effect.  
253. Administration limited to collection and preservation of deceased ’s property. —In any case 
in which it appears necessary for preserving the property of a deceased person, the Court within whose 
jurisdiction any of the property is si tuate may grant to. any person, whom such Court may think fit, letters 
of administration limited to the collection and preservation of the property of the deceased and to the 
giving of discharges for debts due to his estate, subject to the directions of th e Court.  
254. Appointment, as administrator, of person other than one who, in ordinary circumstances, 
would be entitled to administration. —(1) When a person has died intestate, or leaving a will of which 
there is no executor willing and competent to act or  where the executor is, at the time of the death of such 
person, resident out of the State, and it appears to the Court to be necessary or convenient toappoint some 
person to administer the estate or any part thereof, other than the person who, in ordinary  circumstances, 72 would be  entitled to a grant of administration, the Court may, in its discretion, having regard to 
consanguinity, amount of interest, the safety of the estate and probability that it will be properly 
administered, appoint such person as it thinks fit to be administrator.  
(2) In every such case letters of administration may be limited or not as the Court thinks fit,  
Grants with exception  
255. Probate or administration, with will annexed, subject to exception. —Whenever the nature of 
the case requires that an exception be made, probate of a will, or letters of administration with the will 
annexed, shall be granted subject to such exception.  
256. Administration with exception. —Whenever the nature of the case requires that an exception be 
made, l etters of administration shall be granted subject to such exception.  
Grants of the rest  
257. Probate or administration of rest. —Whenever a grant with exception of probate, or of letters 
of adminiStration with or without the will annexed, has been made, the  person entitled to probate or 
administration of the remainder of the deceased's estate may take a grant of probate or letters of 
administration, as the case may be, of the rest of the deceased's estate.  
Grant of effects unadministered  
258. Grant of effect s unadm inistered. —If an executor to whom probate has been granted has died, 
leaving a part of the testator's estate unadministered, a new representative may be appointed for the 
purpose of administering such part of the estate.  
259. Rules as to grants of e ffects unadministered. —In granting letters of administration of an estate 
not fully administered, the Court shall be guided by the same rules as apply to original grants, and shall 
grant letters of administration to those persons only to whore original gra nts might have been made.  
260. Administration when limited grant expired and still some part of estate unadministered. —
When a limited grant has expired, by efflux of time, or the happening of the event or contingency on, 
which it was limited, and there is still some part of the deceased's estate unadministered, letters of 
administration shall be granted to those persons to whom original grants might have been made.  
CHAPTER  III.—Alteration and Revocation of Grants  
261. What errors may be rectified by Court. —Errors in names and descriptions, or in setting forth 
the time and place of the deceased ’s death or the purpose in a limited grant, may be rectified by the Court 
and the grant of probate or letters of administration may be altered and amended accordingly.  
262. Procedure where codicil discovered after grant of administration with will annexed. —If, 
after the grant of letters of administration with the will annexed, a codicil is discovered, it may be added 
to the grant on due proof and identification, and the grant may be altered and amended accordingly.  
263. Revocation or annulment for just cause. —Thegrant of probate or letters of administration may 
be revoked or annulled for just cause.  
Explanation .—Just cause shall be deemed to exist where — 
(a) the proceedings to obtain the grant were defective in substance; or  
(b) the grant was obtained fraudulently by making a false suggestion, or by concealing from the 
Court something material to the case; or  
(c) the grant was obtained by means of an untrue allegation of a fact essential in point of law to 
justify the grant, though such allegation was made in ignorance or inadvertently; or  
(d) the grant has become useless and inoperative through circumstances; or  73 (e) the person  to whom the grant was made has wilfully and without reasonable cause omitted to 
exhibit an inventory or account in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of this Part, or has 
exhibited under that Chapter an inventory or account which is untrue in a material respect.  
Illustrations  
(i) The Court by which the grant was made had no jurisdiction.  
(ii) The grant was made without citing parties who ought to have been iited.  
(iii) The will of which probate was obtained was forged or revoked.  
(iv) A obtained letters of adminis tration to the estate of B, as his widow, but it has since transpired that she was 
never married to him.  
(v) A has taken administration to the estate of B as if he had die d intestate, but a will has since been discovered.  
(vi) Since probate was granted, a later will has been discovered.  
(vii) Since probate was granted, a codicil has been discovered which revokes or adds to the appointment of 
executors under the will.  
(viii) The person to whom probate was, or letters of administration were, granted has subsequently become of 
unsound mind.  
CHAPTER  IV.—Of the Practice in granting and revoking Probates andLettersof Administration  
264. Jurisdiction of District Judge in granting and revoking probates, etc. —(1) The District 
Judge shall have jurisdiction in gra nting and revoking probates and letters of administration in all cases 
within his district.  
(2) Except incrases to which section 57 applies, no Court in any local area beyond the limits ofthe 
towns  of Calcutta, Madras and Bomba1*** shall, where the decease d is a Hindu,Muhammadan,Buddhist, 
Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person, receive applications for probate or letters ofadministration until the 
State Government has, by a notification in the Official Gazette, authorised it so to do.  
265. Power to appoint del egate of District Judge to deal with non -contentious cases. —(1) The 
High Court may appoint such judicial officers within any district as it thinks fit to act for the District 
Judge as delegates to grant probate and letters of administration in non -contenti ous cases, within such 
local limits as it may prescribe:  
Provided that, in the case of High Courts not established by Royal Charter, such appointments shall 
not be without the previous sanction of the State Government.  
(2) Persons so appointed shall be cal led “District Delegates ”. 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act 39 of 1925 .—In the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (Central Act 39 of 
1925) as in force in the State of Karnataka, section 265 shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 28 of 1978, s. 4].  
266. District Judge ’s powers as to grant of probate and administration. —The District Judge shall 
have the like powers and authority in relation to the granting of probate and letters of administration and 
all matters connected therewith, as are by law ves ted in him in relation to any civil suit or proceeding 
pending in his Court.  
267. District Jud ge may order person to produce testamentary papers. —(1) The District Judge 
may order any person to produce and bring into Court any paper or writing, being or pur porting to be 
testamentary, which may be shown to be in the possession or under the control of such person.  
(2) If it is not shown that any such paper or writing is in the possession or under the control of such 
person, but there is reason to believe that he has the knowledge of any such paper or writing, the Court 
may direct such person to attend for the purpose of being examined respecting the same.  
                                                      
1. The words “and the province of Burma ” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  74 (3) Such  person shall be bound to answer truly such question as may be put to him by the Court, and, 
if so ordered, to produce and bring in such paper or writing, and shall be subject to the like punishment 
under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), in case of default in not attending or in notanswering such 
question or not bringing in such paper or writing, as he would have been subject to in case he had been a 
party to a suit and had made such default.  
(4) The costs of the proceeding shall be in the discretion of the Judge.  
268. Proceedings of District Judge ’s Court in relation to probate and administration. —The 
proceeding of the Court of the District Judge in relation to the granting of probate and letters of 
administration shall, save as hereinafter otherwise provided, be regulated, so far as the circumstances of 
the case permit, by the Code of Civil Procedu re, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
269. When and how District Judge to interfere for protection of property. —(1) Until probate is 
granted of the will of a deceased person, or an administrator of his estate is constituted, the District Judge, 
within whose jurisdiction a ny part of the property of the deceased person is situate, is authorised and 
required to interfere for the protection of such property at the instance of any person claiming to be 
interested therein, and in all other cases where the Judge considers that th e property incurs any risk of loss 
or damage; and for that purpose, if he thinks fit, to appoint an officer to take and keep possession of the 
property,  
(2) This section shall not apply when the deceased' is a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina 
or an exempted person, nor shall it apply to any part of the property of an Indian Christian who has died 
intestate.  
270. When probate or administration may be granted by District Judge. —Probate of the will or 
letters of administration to the estate of a dece ased person may be granted by a District Judge under the 
seal of his Court, if it appears by a petition, verified as hereinafter provided, of the person applying for the 
same that the testator or intestate, as the case may be, at the time of his decease ha d a fixed place of 
abode, or any property, moveable or immoveable, within the jurisdiction of the Ridge.  
271. Disposal of application made to Judge of district in which deceased had no fixed abode. —
When the application is made to the Judge of a district in  which the deceased had no fixed abode at the 
time of his death, it shall be in the discretion of the Judge to refuse the application, if in his judgment it 
could be disposed of more justly or conveniently in another district, or, where the applicat ion is for letters 
of administration, to grant them absolutely, or limited to the property within his own jurisdiction.  
272. Probate and letters of administration may be granted by Delegate. —Probate and letters of 
administration may, upon application for that pur pose to any District Delegate, be granted by him in any 
case in which there is no contention, if it appears by petition, verified as hereinafter provided, that the 
testator or intestate, as the case may be, at the time of his death had a fixed place of abo de within the 
jurisdiction of such Delegate.  
273. Conclusiveness of probate or letters of administration. —Probate or letters of administration 
shall have effect over all the property and estate, moveable or immoveable, of the deceased, throughout 
the State  in which the same is or are granted, and shall be conclusive as to the representative title against 
all debtors of the deceased, and all persons holding property which belongs to him, and shall afford full 
indemnity to all debtors, paying their debts and all persons delivering up such property to the person to 
whom such probate or letters of administration have been granted:  
Provided that probates and letters of administration granted —  
(a) by a High Court, or  
(b) by a District Judge, where the deceased at the time of his death had a fixed place of abode 
situate within the jurisdiction of such Judge, and such Judge certifies that the value of the propertyand 
estate affected beyond the limits of the State does not ex ceed ten thousand rupees,shal l, unless 
otherwise directed by the gran t, have like effect throughout 1[the other States 2***]. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “the whole of British India “.  
2. The words “of India” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  75 1[The proviso  to this section shall apply in 2[India] 3after the separation of Burma and Aden from 
India to probates and letters of administration granted in Burma and Aden before the date of the 
separation, or after that date in proceedings which were pending at that date.]  
4[The proviso shall also apply in 2[India] 5*** 6after the separation of Pakistan from India to probates 
and letters of administration granted before the date of the separation, or after that date in procedings 
pending at that date, in any of the territories which on that date constituted Pakistan.]  
274. Transmission to High Courts of certificate of grants under proviso to section 273. —(1) 
Where probate or letters of administration has or have been granted by a High Court or District Judge 
with the effect referred to in the proviso to section 273, the High Court or District Judge shall send a 
certificate thereof t o the following Courts, namely: — 
(a) when the grant has been made by a High Court, to each of the other High Courts;  
(b) when the grant has been made by a District Judge, to the High Court to which such District 
Judge is subordinate and to each of the othe r High Courts.  
(2) Every certificate referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be made as nearly as circumstances admit in 
the form set forth in Schedule IV, and such certificate shall be filed by the High Court receiving the same.  
(3) Where any portion of the assets has been stated by the petitioner, as hereinafter provided in 
sections 276 and 278, to be situate within the jurisdiction of a District Judge in another State, the Court 
required to send the certificate referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall send a co py thereof to such District 
Judge, and such copy shall be filed by the District Judge receiving the same.  
275. Conclusiveness of application for probate or administration if properly made and 
verified. —The application for probate or letters of administrati on, if made and verified in the manner 
hereinafter provided, shall be conclusive for the purpose of authorising the grant of probate or 
administration; and no such grant shall be impeached by reason only that the testator or intestate had no 
fixed place of  abode or no property within the district at the time of his death, unless by a proceeding to 
revoke the grant if obtained by a fraud upon the Court.  
276. Petition for probate. —(1) Application for probate or for letters of administration, with the will 
annexed, shall be made by a petition distinctly written in English or in the language in ordinary use in 
proceedings before the Court in which the application is made, with the will or, in the cases mentioned in 
sections 237, 238 and 239, a copy, draft, or st atement of the contents thereof, annexed, and stating —  
(a) the time of the testator ’s death,  
(b) that the writing annexed is his last will and testament,  
(c) that it was duly executed,  
(d) the amount of assets which are likely to come to the petitioner ’s hands, and  
(e) when the application is for probate, that the petitioner is the executor named in the will.  
(2) In addition to these particulars, the petition shall further state, —  
(a) when the application is to the District Judge, that the deceased at the  time of his death had a 
fixed place of abode, or had some property, situate within the jusrisdiction of the Judge; and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “the States”.  
3. 1st April, 1937.  
4. Added by the A.O. 1948.  
5. The words “of India” omitted by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and Sch. III.  
6. 15th August, 1947.  76 (b) when  the application is to a District Delegate, that the deceased at the time of his death had a 
fixed place of abode within the jurisdiction of such Delegate.  
(3) Where the application is to the District Judge and any portion of the assets likely to come to t he 
petitioner's hands is situate in another State, the petition shall further state the amount of such assets in 
each State and the District Judges within whose jurisdiction such assets are situate.  
277. In what cases translation of will to be annexed to p etition. Verification of translation by 
person other than Court translator. —In cases wherein the will, copy or draft, is written in any 
language other than English or than that in ordinary use in proceedings before the Court, there shall be a 
translation t hereof annexed to the petition by a translator of the Court, if the language be one for which a 
translator is appointed; or, if the will, copy or draft, is in any other language, then by any person 
competent to translate the same, in which case such transl ation shall be verified by that person in the 
following manner, namely: —  
“I (A.B.) do declare that I read and perfectly understand the language and character of the 
original, and that the above is a true and accurate translation thereof. ” 
278. Petition for letters of administration. —(1) Application for letters of administration shall be 
made by petition distinctly written as aforesaid and stating —  
(a) the time and place of the deceased's death;  
(b) the family or other relatives of the deceased, and their respective residences;  
(c) the right in which the petitioner claims;  
(d) the amount of assets which are likely to come to the petitioner's hands;  
(e) when the application is to the District Judge, that the deceased at the time of his death had a 
fixed plac e of abode, or had some property, situate within the jurisdiction of the Judge; and  
(f) when the application is to a District Delegate, that the deceased at the time of his death had a 
fixed place of abode within the jurisdiction of such Delegate.  
(2) Wher e the application is to the District Judge and any portion of the assets likely to come to the 
petitioner ’s hands is situate in another State, the petition shall further state the amount of such assets in 
each State and the District Judges within whose jur isdiction such assets are situate.  
279. Addition to statement in petition, etc., for probate or letters of administration in certain 
cases. —(1) Every person applying to any of the Courts mentioned in the proviso to section 273 for 
probate of a will or lett ers of administration of an estate intended to have effect throughout 1[India], shall 
state in his petition, in addition to the matters respectively required by section 276 and section 278, that to 
the best of his belief no application has been made to any  other Court for a probate of the same will or for 
letters of administration of the same estate, intended to have such effect as last aforesaid,  
or, where any such application has been made, the Court to which it was made, the person or persons by 
whom it was made and the proceedings (if any) had thereon.  
(2) The Court to which any such application is made under the proviso to section 273 may, if it thinks 
fit, reject the same.  
280. Petition for probate, etc., to be signed and verified. —The petition for pro bate or letters of 
administration shall in all cases be subscribed by the petitioner and his pleader, if any, and shall be 
verified by the petitioner in the following manner, namely: —  
“I (A.B.), the petitioner in the above petition, declare that what is s tated therein is true to the best 
of my information and belief. ” 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for “the States ”. 77 281. Verification  of petition for probate, by one witness to will. —Where the application is for 
probate, the petition shall also be verified by at least one of the witnesses to  the will (when procurable) in 
the manner or to the effect following, namely: —  
“I (C.D.), one of the witnesses to the last will and testament of the testator mentioned in the above 
petition, declare that I was present and saw the said testator affix his s ignature (or mark) thereto (or 
that the said testator acknowledged the writing annexed to the above petition to be his last will and 
testament in my presence). ” 
282. Punishment for false averment in petition or declaration. —If any petition or declaration 
which is hereby required to be verified contains any averment which the person making the verification 
knows or believes to be false, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 
193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
283. Pow ers of District Judge. —(1) In all cases the District Judge or District Delegate may, if he 
thinks proper, —  
(a) examine the petitioner in person, upon oath;  
(b) require further evidence of the due execution of the will or the right of the petitioner to the  
letters of administration, as the case may be;  
(c) issue citations calling upon all persons claiming to have any interest in the estate of the 
deceased to come and see the proceedings before the grant of probate or letters of administration.  
(2) The citat ion shall be fixed up in some conspicuous part of the courthouse, and also in the office of 
the Collector of the district and otherwise published or made known in such manner as the Judge or 
District Delegate issuing the same may direct.  
(3) Where any port ion of the assets has been stated by the petitioner to be situate within the 
jurisdiction of a District Judge in another State, the District Judge issuing the same shall cause a copy of 
the citation to be sent to such other District Judge, who shall publis h the same in the same manner as if it 
were a citation issued by himself, and shall certify such publication to the District Judge who issued the 
citation.  
284. Caveats against grant of probate or administration. —(1) Caveats against the grant of probate 
or administration may be lodged with the District Judge or a District Delegate.  
(2) Immediately on any caveat being lodged with any District Delegate, he shall send copy thereof to 
the District Judge.  
(3) Immediately on a caveat being entered with the Distri ct Judge, a copy thereof shall be given to the 
District Delegate, if any, within whose jurisdiction it is alleged the deceased had a fixed place of abode at 
the time of his death, and to any other Judge or District Delegate to whom it may appear to the Dis trict 
Judge expedient to transmit the same.  
Form of caveat. —(4) The caveat shall be made as nearly as circumstances admit in the form set forth 
in Schedule V.  
285. After entry of caveat, no proceeding taken on petition until after notice to caveator. —No 
proceeding shall be taken on a petition for probate or letters of administration after a caveat against the 
grant thereof has been entered with the Judge or District Delegate to whom the application has been made 
or notice has been given of its entry with so me other Delegate, until after such notice to the person by 
whom the same has been entered as the Court may think reasonable.  
286. District Delegate when not to grant probate or administration. —A District Delegate shall 
not grant probate or letters of admi nistration in any case in which there is contention as to the grant, or in 
which it otherwise appears to him that probate or letters of administration ought not to be granted in his 
Court.  
Explanation .—“Contention ” means the appearance of any one in person , or by his recognizedagent, 
or by a pleader duly appointee to act on his behalf, to oppose the proceeding.  78 287. Power to  transmit statement to District Judge in doubtful cases where no contention. —In 
every case in which there is no contention, but it appe ars to the District Delegate doubtful whether the 
probate or letters of administration should or should not be granted, or when any question arises in 
relation to the grant, or application for the grant, of any probate or letters of administration, the Dis trict 
Delegate may, if he thinks proper, transmit a statement of the matter in question to the District Judge, who 
may direct the District Delegate to proceed in the matter of the application, according to such instructions 
as to the Judge may seem necessa ry, or may forbid any further proceeding by the District Delegate in 
relation to the matter of such application, leaving the party applying for the grant in question to make 
application to the Judge.  
288. Procedure where there is contention of District Delegate thinks probate or letters of 
administration should be refused in his Court. —In every case in which there is contention, or the 
District Delegate is of opinion that the probate or letters of administration should be refused in his Court, 
the petiti on, with any documents which may have been filed therewith, shall be returned to the person by 
whom the application was made, in order that the same may be presented to the District Judge, unless the 
District Delegate thinks it necessary, for the purposes of justice, to impound the same, which he is hereby 
authorised to do; and, in that case, the same shall be sent by him to the District Judge.  
289. Grant of probate to be under seal of Court. —When it appears to the District Judge or District 
Delegate that p robate of a will should be granted, he shall grant the same under the seal of his Court in the 
form set forth in Schedule VI.  
290. Grant of letters of administration to be under seal of Court. —When it appears to the District 
Judge or District Delegate that  letters of administration to the estate of a person deceased, with or without 
a copy of the will annexed, should be granted, he shall grant the same under the seal of his Court in the 
form set forth in Schedule VII.  
291. Administration -bond. —(1) Every per son to whom any grant of letters of administration, other 
than a grant under section 241, is committed, shall give a bond to the District Judge with one or more 
surety or sureties, engaging for the due collection, getting in, and administering the estate o f the deceased, 
which bond shall be in such form as the Judge may, by general or special order, direct.  
(2) When the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person —  
(a) the exception made by sub -section ( 1) in respect of a  grant under section 241 shall not 
operate.  
(b) the District Judge may demand a like bond from any person to whom probate is granted.  
292. Assignment of administration -bond. —The Court may, on application made by petition and on 
being satisfied that the engagement of any such bond has not been kept, and upon such terms as to 
security, or providing that the money received be paid into Court, or otherwise, as the Court may think fit, 
assign the same to some person, his executors or administrators, who shall  thereupon be entitled to sue on 
the said bond in his or their own name or names as if the same had been originally given to him or them 
instead of to the Judge of the Court, and shall be entitled to recover thereon, as trustees for all persons 
interested,  the full amount recoverable in respect of any breach thereof,  
293. Time for grant of probate and administration. —No probate of a will shall be granted until 
after the expiration of seven clear days, and no letters of administration shall be granted until after the 
expiration of fourteen clear days, from the day of the testator or intestate ’s death.  
294. Filing of original wills of which probate or administrat ion with will annexed granted. —(1) 
Every District Judge, or District Delegate, shall file and prese rve all original wills, of which probate or 
letters of administra tion with the will annexed may be granted by him, among the records of his  Court, 
until some public registry for wills is established.  79 (2) The State  Government shall make regulat ions for the preservation and inspection of the wills so 
filed.  
295. Procedure in contentious cases. —In any case before the District Judge in which there is 
contention, the proceedings shall take, as nearly as may be, the form of a regular suit, according to the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in which the petitioner for probate or letters 
of administration, as the case may be, shall be the plaintiff, and the person who has appeared to oppose 
the grant shall be the defendant.  
296. Surrender of revoked probate or letters of administration .—(1) When a grant of probate or 
letters of administration is revoked or annulled under this Act, the person to whom the grant was made 
shall forthwith deliver up the probate or letters to the Court which made the grant.  
(2) If such person willfully and without reasonable cause omits so to deliver up the probate or letters, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with both.  
297. Payment to executor or administrator before probate or administration revoked. —When a 
grant of probate or letters of administration is revoked, all payments bona fide made to any executor or 
administrator under such gran t before the revocation thereof shall, notwithstanding such revocation, be a 
legal discharge to the person making the same; and the executor or administrator who has acted under any 
such revoked grant may retain and reimburse himself in respect of any paym ents made by him which the 
person to whom probate or letters of administration may afterwards be granted might have lawfully made.  
298. Power to refuse letters of administration. —Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, 
it shall, where the deceased ' was a Muhammadan, Buddhist or exempted person, or a Hindu, Sikh or Jaina 
to whom section 57 does not apply, be in the discretion of the Court to make an order refusing, for 
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, to grant any application for letters of administration made lousier 
this Act.  
299. Appeals from orders of District Judge. —Every order made by a District Judge by virtue of the 
powers hereby conferred upon him shall be subject to appeal to the High. Court in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), applicable to appeals.  
300. Concurrent jurisdiction of High Court. —(1) The High Court shall have concurrent 
jurisdiction with the District Judge in the exercise of all the powers hereby conferred upon the District  
Judge.  
(2) Except in cases to which section 57 applies, no High Court, in exercise of the concurrent 
jurisdicti on hereby conferred over any local area beyond the limits of the towns of Calcutta, Madras and 
Bombay 1*** shall, where the deceased is a Hindu,  Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an 
exempted person, receive applications for probate or letters of administration  until the State Government 
has by a notification in the Official Gazette, authorised it so to do.  
301. Remov al of executor or administ rator and provision for successor. —The High Court may, 
on application made to it, suspend, remove or discharge any private executor or administrator and provide 
for the succession of another person to the office of any' such executor or admi nistrator wh o may cease to 
hold office, and the vesting in such successor of any property belonging to the estate.  
302. Directions to executor or administrator. —Where probate or letters of administration in 
respect of any estate has or have been granted under this Act, t he High Court may, on application made to 
it, give to the executor or administrator any general or special directions in regard to the estate or in 
regard to the administration thereof.  
                                                      
1. The words “and the province of Burma”  omitted by the A.O. 1937.  80 CHAPTER  V.—Of Executors of their own Wrong  
303. Executor of his own wrong. —A person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased or 
does any other act which belongs to the office of executor, while there is no rightful executor or 
administrator in existence, thereby makes himself an executor of his own wrong.  
Exceptions .—(1) Intermeddling with the goods of the deceased for the purpose of preserving them or 
providing for his funeral or for the immediate necessities of his family or property, does not make an 
executor of his own wrong.  
(2) Dealing in t he ordinary course of business with goods of the deceased received from another does 
not make an executor of his own wrong.  
Illustrations  
(i) A uses or gives away or sells some of the goods of the deceased, or takes them to satisfy his own debt or 
legacy or receives payment of the debts of the deceased. He is an executor of his own wrong.  
(ii) A, having been appointed agent by the deceased in h is lifetime to collect his debts and sell his goods, 
continues to do so after he has become aware of his death. He is an executor of his own wrong in respect of acts 
done after he has become aware of the death of the deceased.  
(iii) A sues as executor of t he deceased, not being such. He is an executor of his own wrong.  
304. Liability o f executor of his own wrong .—When a person has so acted as to become an 
executor of his own wr ong, he is answerable to the rightful executor or administrator, or to any credit or or 
legatee of the deceased, to the extent of the assets which may have come to his hands after deducting 
payments made to the rightful executor or administrator, and payments made in due course of 
administration.  
CHAPTER  VI.—Of the Powers of an Executor  or Administrator  
305. In respect of causes of action surviving deceased and debts due at death. —An executor or 
administrator has the same power to sue in respect of all causes of action that survive the deceased, and 
may exercise the same power for the re covery of debts as the deceased had when living.  
306. Demands and rights of action of or against deceased survive to and against executor or 
administrator. —All demands whatsoever and all rights to prosecute or defend any action or special 
proceeding existing in favour of or against a person at the time of his decease, survive to and against his 
executors or administrators; except causes of action for defamati on, assault, as defined in the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), or other personal injuries not causing the death of the party; and except also cases 
where, after the death of the party, the relief sought could not be enjoyed or granting it would be 
nugatory . 
Illustrations  
(i) A collision takes place on a railway in consequence of some neglect or default of an official, and a passenger 
is severely hurt, but not so as to cause death. He afterwards dies without having brought any action. action does not 
survive . 
(ii) A sues for divorce. A dies. The cause of action does not survive to his representative.  
307. Power of executor or administrator to dispose of property. —(1) Subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2), and executor or administrator has power to disp ose of the property of the deceased, 
vested in him under section 211, either wholly or in part, in suchmanner as he may think fit.  
Illustrations  
(i) The deceased has made a specific bequest of part of his property. The executor, not having assented to the 
bequest, sells the subject of it. The sale is valid.  
(ii) The executor in the exercise of his discretion mortgages a part of the immoveable estate of the deceased. 
The mortgage is valid.  81 (2) If the  deceased was a Hindu, Muhammad an, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person, the 
general power conferred by sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the following restrictions and conditions, 
namely: — 
(i) The power of an executor to dispose of immovable property so vested in him is subject to any 
restriction which may be imposed in this behalf by the Will appointing him, unless probate has been 
granted to him and the Court which granted the probate permits him by an order in writing, 
notwithstanding the restriction, to dispose of any immovable prop erty specified in the order in a 
manner permitted by the order.  
(ii) An administrator may not, without the previous permission of the Court by which the letters 
of administration were granted, — 
(a) mortgage, charge or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or ot herwise any immovable property 
for the time being vested in him under section 211, or  
(b) lease any such property for a term exceeding five years.  
(iii) A disposal of property by an executor or administrator in contravention of clause ( i) or clause 
(ii), as the case may be, is voidable at the instance of any other person interested in the property.  
(3) Before any probate or letters of administration is or are granted in such a case, there shall be 
endorsed thereon or annexed thereto a copy of sub -section ( 1) and clauses ( i) and ( iii) of sub -section ( 2) 
or of sub -section ( 1) and clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of sub -section ( 2), as the case may be.  
(4) A probate or letters of administration shall not be rendered invalid by reason of the endorsement 
or annexure requi red by sub -section ( 3) not having been made thereon or attached thereto, nor shall the 
absence of such an endorsement or annexure authorise an executor or administrator to act otherwise than 
in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
 308. General powers of administration. —An executor or administrator may, in addition to, and not 
in derogation of any other powers of expenditure lawfully exercisable by him, incur expenditure — 
(a) on such acts as may be necessary for the proper care or management of a ny property 
belonging to any estate administered by him; and  
(b) with the sanction of the High Court, on such religious, charitable and other objects, and on 
such improvements, as may be reasonable and proper in the case of such property.  
309. Commission or agency charges. —An executor or administrator shall not be entitled to receive 
or retain any commission or agency charges at a higher rate than that for the time being fixed in respect of 
the Administrator -General by or under the Administrator -General ’s Act, 1913 (3 of 1913).  
310. Purchase by executor or administrator of deceased ’s property. —If any executor or 
administrator purchases, either directly or indirectly, any part of the property of the deceased, the sale is 
voidable at the instance of any other  person interested in the property sold.  
311. Powers of several executors or administrators exercisable by one.  —When there are several 
executors or administrators, the powers of all may, in the absence of any direction to the contrary, be 
exercised by any  one of them who has proved the Will or taken out administration.  
Illustrations  
(i) One of several executors has power to release a debt due to the deceased.  
(ii) One has power to surrender a lease.  
(iii) One has power to sell the property of the deceased whether movable or immovable.  
(iv) One has power to assent to a legacy.  
(v) One has power to endorse a promissory note payable to the deceased.  
(vi) The Will appoints A, B, C and D to be executors, and directs that two of them shall be a quorum. No act can  
be done by a single executor.  82 312. Survival  of powers on death of one of several executors or administrators. —Upon the death 
of one or more of several executors or administrators, in the absence of any direction to the contrary in 
the will or  grant of letters of administration, all the powers of the office become vested in the survivors or 
survivor.  
313. Powers of administrator of effects unadministered. —The administrator of effects 
unadministered has, with respect to such effects, the same po wers as the original executor or 
administrator.  
314. Powers of administrator during minority. —An administrator during minority has all the 
powers of an ordinary administrator:  
315. Powers of married executrix or administratrix. —When a grant of prob ate or l etters of 
administration  has been made to a married woman, she has all the powers of an ordinary executor or 
administrator.  
CHAPTER  VII.—Of the Duties of an Executor or Administrator  
316. As to deceased’ s funeral. —It is the duty of an executor to provide f unds for the performance of 
the necessary funeral ceremonies of the deceased in a manner suitable to his condition, if he has left 
property sufficient for the purpose.  
317. Inventory and account. —(1) An executor or administrator shall, within six months fr om the 
grant of probate or letters of administration, or within such further time as the Court which granted the 
probate or letters may appoint, exhibit in that Court an inventory containing a full and true estimate of. all 
the property in possession, and all the credits, and also all the debts owing by any person to which the 
executor or administrator is entitled in that character; and shall in like manner, within one year from the 
grant or within such further time as the said Court may appoint, exhibit an  account of the estate, showing 
the assets which have come to his hands and the manner in which they have been applied or disposed of.  
The High Court may prescribe the form in which an inventory or account under this section is to be 
exhibited.  
If an execu tor or administrator, on being required by the Court to exhibit an inventory or account 
under this section, intentionally omits to comply with the requisition, he shall be deemed to have 
committed an offence under section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 o f 1860).  
The exhibition of an intentionally false inventory or account under this section shall be deemed to be 
an offence under section 193 of that Code.  
318. Inventory to include property in any part of India in certain cases. — in all cases where a 
grant  has been made of probate or letters of administration intended to have  
effect throughout 1[India] 2***, the executor or administrator shall include in the inventory of the 
effects of the deceased all his moveable and immoveable property situate in '[India ], and the value of such 
property situate in each state shall be separately stated in such inventory, and the probate or letters of 
administration shall be chargeable with a fee corresponding to the entire amount or value of the property 
affected thereby w heresoever situate within 1[India].  
319. As to property of, and debts owing to, deceased. —The executor or administrator shall collect, 
with reasonable diligence, the property of the deceased and the debts that were due to him at the time of 
his death.  
320. Expenses to be paid before all debts. —Funeral expenses to a reasonable amount, according to 
the degree and quality of the deceased, and death -bed charges, including fees for medical attendance, and 
board and lodging for one month previous to his death, sh all be paid before all debts.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for “the St ates”. 
2. The words “of India ” omitted by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  83 321. Expenses  to be paid next after such expenses. —The expenses of obtaining probate or letters of 
administration, including the costs incurred for or in respect of any judicial proceedings that may be 
necessary for administeri ng the estate, shall be paid next after the funeral expenses and death -bed charges.  
322. Wages for certain services to be next paid, and then other debts. —Wages due for services 
rendered to the deceased within three months next preceding his death by any l abourer, artizan or 
domestic servant shall next be paid, and then the other debts of the deceased according to their respective 
priorities (if any).  
323. Save as aforesaid, all debts to  be paid equally and rateably. —Save as aforesaid, no creditor 
shall hav e a right of priority over another; but the executor or administrator shall pay all such debts as he 
knows of, including his own, equally and rateably as far as the assets of the deceased will extend.  
324. Application of moveable property to payment of deb ts where domicile not in India. —(1) If 
the domicile of the deceased was not in 1[India], the application of his moveable property to the payment 
of his debts is to be regulated by the law of 1[India].  
(2) No creditor who has received payment of a part of h is debt by virtue of sub -section ( 1) shall be 
entitled to share in the proceeds of the immoveable estate of the deceased unless he brings such payment 
into account for the benefit of the other creditors.  
(3) This section shall not apply where the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or 
Jaina or an exempted person.  
Illustration  
A dies, having his domicile in a country where instruments under seal have priority over instruments not under 
seal leaving moveable property to the value of 5,000 rupees, and immoveable property to the value of 10,000 rupees, 
debts on instruments under se al to the amount of 10,000 rupees, and debts on instruments not under seal to the same 
mount. The creditors holding instruments under seal received half of their debts out of the proceeds of the moveable 
estate. The proceeds of the immoveable estate are to  be applied in payment of the debts on instruments not under 
seal until one -half of such debts have been discharged. This will leave 5,000 rupees which are to be distributed 
rateably amongst all the creditors without distinction, in proportion to the amoun t which may remain due to them.  
325. Debts to be paid before legacies. —Debts of every description must be paid before any legacy.  
326. Executor or administrator not bound to pay legacies without indemnity. —If the estate of the 
deceased is subject to any co ntingent liabilities, an executor or administrator is not bound to pay any 
legacy without a sufficient indemnity to meet the liabilities whenever they may become due.  
327. Abatement of general legacies. —If the assets, after payment of debts, necessary expe nses and 
specific legacies, are not sufficient to pay all the general legacies in full, the latter shall abate or be 
diminished in equal proportions, and, in the absence of any direction to the contrary in the will, the 
executor has no right to pay one leg atee in preference to another, or to retain any money on account of a 
legacy to himself or to any person for whom he is a trustee.  
328. Non-abatement of specific legacy when assets sufficient to pay debts. —Where there is a 
specific legacy, and the assets a re sufficient for the payment of debts and necessary expenses, the thing 
specified must be delivered to the legatee without any abatement.  
329. Right under demonstrative legacy when assets sufficient to pay debts and necessary 
expenses. —Where there is a de monstrative legacy, and the assets are sufficient for the payment of debts 
and necessary expenses, the legatee has a preferential claim for payment of Isis legacy out of the fund 
from which the legacy is directed to be paid until such fund is exhausted and  if, after the fund is 
exhausted, part of the legacy still remains unpaid, he is entitled to rank for the remainder against the 
general assets as for a legacy of the amount of such unpaid remainder.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for "the States".  84 330. Rateable  abatement of specific legaci es.—If the assets are not sufficent to answer the debtsand 
the specific legacies, an abatement shall be made from the latter rateably in proportion to their respective 
amounts.  
Illustration  
A has bequeathed to B a diamond ring valued at 500 rupees, and to C a horse, valued at 1,000 rupees. It. is 
found necessary to sell all the effects of the testator; and his assets, after payment of debts, are only 1,000 rupees. Of 
this sum rupees 333 -5-4 are to be paid to B, and rupees 666 -10-8 to C.  
331. Legacies treate d as general for purpose of abatement. —For the purpose of abatement, a 
legacy for life, a sum appropriated by the will to produce an annuity, and the value of an annuity whe n no 
sum has been appropriated to produce it, shall be treated as general legacies.  
CHAPTER  VIII. —Ofassent to a legacy by Executor or Administrator  
332. Assent necessary to complete legatee ’s title. —The assent of the executor or administrator is 
necessary to complete a legatee's title to his legacy.  
Illustrations  
(i) A by his will bequeaths to B his Government paper which is in deposit with the Imperial Bank of India. The 
Bank has no authority to deliver the securities, nor B a right to take possession of them, without the assent of the 
executor.  
(ii) A by - his will has bequeathed t o C his house in Calcutta in the tenancy of B. C is not entitled to receive the 
rents without the assent of the executor or administrator.  
333. Effect of executor ’s assent to specific legacy. —(1) The assent of the executor oradministrator 
to a specific beq uest shall be sufficient tb divest his interest as executor or administrator therein, and to 
transfer the subject of the bequest of the legatee, unless the nature or the circumstances of the property 
require that it shall be transferred in a particular way . 
(2) This assent may be verbal, and it may be either express or implied from the conduct of the 
executor or administrator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A horse is bequeathed. The executor requests the legatee to dispose of it, or a third party proposes to 
purchase t he horse from the executor, and he directs him to apply to the legatee. Assent to the legacy is implied.  
(ii) The interest of a fund is directed by the will to be applied for the maintenance of the legatee during his 
minority. The executor commences so to apply it. This is an assent to the whole of the bequest.  
(iii) A bequest is made of a fund to A and after him to B. The executor pays the interest of the fund to A. This is 
an implied assent to the bequest to B.  
(iv) Executors die after paying all the debt s of the testator, but before satisfaction of specific legacies. Assent to 
the legacies may be presumed.  
(v) A person to whom a specific article has been bequeathed takes possession of it and retains it without any 
objection on the part of the executor. Hi s assent may be presumed.  
334. Conditional assent. —The assent of an executor or administrator to a legacy may be conditional, 
and if the condition is one which he has a right to enforce, and it is not performed, there is no assent.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B his lands of Sultanpur, which at the date of the will, and at the death of A, were subject to a 
mortgage for 10,000 rupees. The executor assents to the bequest, on condition that B shall within a limited time pay 
the amount due on the mort gage at the testator's death. The amount is not paid. There is no assent.  
(ii) The executor assents to a bequest on condition that the legatee shall pay him a sum of money. The payment 
is not made. The assent is nevertheless valid.  85 335. Assent  of executor to his own legacy. —(1) When the executor or administrator is a legatee, his 
assent to his own legacy is necessary to complete his title to it, in the same way as it is required when the 
bequest is to another person, and his assent may, in like  manner, be expressed or implied.  
(2) Assent shall be implied if in his manner of administering the property he does any act which is 
referable to his character of legatee and is not referable to his character of executor or administrator.  
Illustration  
An executor takes the rent of a house or the interest of Government securities bequeathed to him and applied it 
to his own use. This is assent.  
336. Effect of executor ’s assent. —The assent of the executor or administrator to a legacy gives 
effect to it from t he death of the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legatee sells his legacy before it is assented to by the executor. The executor ’s subsequent assent operates 
for the benefit of the purchaser and completes his title to the legacy.  
(ii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees  to B with interest from his death. The executor does not assent to his legacy until 
the expiration of a year from A's death. B is entitled to interest from the death of A.  
337. Executor when to deliver legacies. —An executor or administrator is not bound to pay or 
deliver any legacy until the expiration of one year from the testator ’s death.  
Illustration  
A by his will directs his legacies to be paid within six months after his death. The executor is not bound to pay 
them before the expiration of a year.  
CHAPTER  IX,—Of the Payment and Apport ionment of Annuities  
338. Commencement of annuity when no time fixed by will. —Where an annuity is given by a will 
and no time is fixed for its commencement, it shall commence from the testator's death, and the first 
payme nt shall be made at the expiration of a year next after that event.  
339. When annuity, to be paid quarterly or monthly, first falls due. —Where there is a direction 
that the annuity shall be paid quarterly or monthly, the first payment shall be due at the e nd of the first 
quarter or first month, as the case may be, after the testator's death; and shall, if the executor or 
administrator thinks fit, be paid when due, but the executor or administrator shall not be bound to pay it 
till the end of the year.  
340. Dates of successive payments when first payment directed to be made within a given time 
or on day certain: death of annuitant before date of payment. —(1) Where there is a direction that the 
first payment of an annuity shall be made within one month or any other division of time from the death 
of the testator, or on a day certain, the successive payments are to be made on the anniversary of the 
earliest day on which the will authorises the first payment to be made.  
(2) If the annuitant dies in the interval b etween the times of payment, an apportioned share of the 
annuity shall be paid to his representative.  
CHAPTER  X.—Of the Investment of Funds to Provide for Legacies  
341. Investment of sum bequeathed, where legacy, not specific, given for life. —Where a legac y, 
not being a specific legacy, is given for life, the sum bequeathed shall at the end of the year he invested in 
such securities as the High Court may by any general rule authorise or direct, and the proceeds thereof 
shall be paid to the legatee as the sa me shall accrue due.  
342. I nvestment of general legacy, to be paid at future time: disposal of intermediate, interest. —
(1) Where a general legacy is given to be paid at a future time, the executor or administrator shall invest a 
sum sufficient to meet it in securities of the kind mentioned in section 341.  
(2) The intermediate interest shall form part of the residue of the testator ’s estate.  86 343. Procedure  when no fund charged with, or appropriated to, annuity. —Where an annuity is 
given and no fund is charged with its payment or appropriated by the will to answer it, a Government 
annuity of the specified amount shall be purchased, or, if no such annuity can be obtained, then a sum 
sufficient to produce the annuity shall be invested for that purp ose in securities of the kind mentioned in 
section 341.  
344. Transfer to residuary legatee of contingent bequest. —Where a bequest is contingent, the 
executor or administrator is not bound to invest the amount of the legacy, but may transfer the whole 
resid ue of the estate to the residuary legatee, if any, on his giving sufficient security for the payment of 
the legacy, if it shall become due.  
345. Investment of residu e bequeathed for life, without  direction to invest in particular 
securities. —(1) Where the testator has bequeathed the residue of his estate to a person for life without 
any direction to invest it in any particular securities, so much thereof as is not at the time of the testator's 
decease invested in securities of the kind mentioned in section 341 shall be converted into money and 
invested in such securities.  
(2) This section shall not apply if the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina 
or an exempted person.  
346. Investment of residue bequeathed for life, with direction to in vest in specified securities. —
When the testator has bequeathed the residue of his estate of a person for life with a direction that it shall 
be invested in certain specified securities, so much of the estate as is not at the time of his death invested 
in securities of the specified kind shall be converted into money and invested in such securities.  
347. Time and manner of conversion and investment. —Such conversion and investment as are 
contemplated by sections 345 and 346 shall be made at such times and in such manner as the executor or 
administrator thinks fit; and, until such conversion and investment are completed, the person who would 
be for the time being entitled to the income of the fund when so invested shall receive interest at the rate 
of 4 per cen t. per annum upon the market -value (to be computed as at the date of the testator's death) of 
such part of the fund as has not been so invested:  
Provided that the rate of interest prior to completio n of investment shall be six per cent.per annum 
when the t estator was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person  
348. Procedure where minor entitled to immediate payment or possession of bequest, and no 
direction to pay to person on his behalf. —(1) Where, by the terms of a bequest, the leg atee is entitled to 
the immediate payment or possession of the money or thing bequeathed, but is a minor, and there is no 
direction in the will to pay it to any person on his behalf, the executor or administrator shall pay or deliver 
the same into the Cour t of the District Judge, by whom or by whose District Delegate the probate was, or 
letters of administration with the will annexed were, granted to the account of the legatee, unless the 
legatee is a ward of the Court of Wards.  
(2) If the legatee is a ward  of the Court of Wards, the legacy shall be paid to the Court of Wards to his 
account.  
(3) Such payment into the Court of the District Judge, or to the Court of Wards, as the case may be, 
shall be a sufficient discharge for the money so paid.  
(4) Money whe n paid in under this section shall be invested in the purchase of Government securities, 
which, with the interest thereon, shall be transferred or paid to the person entitled thereto, or otherwise 
applied for his benefit, as the Judge or the Court of Wards , as the case may be, may direct.  
CHAPTER  XL.—Of the Produce and Interest of Legacies  
349. Legatee ’s title to produce of specific legacy. —The legatee of a specific legacy is entitled to the 
clear produce thereof. if any, from the testator's death.  
Exceptio n.—A specific bequest, contingent in its terms, does not comprise the produce of the legacy 
between the death of the testator and the vesting of the legacy. The clear produce of it forms part of the 
residue of the testator's estate.  87 Illustrati ons 
(i) A bequeaths his flock of sheep to B. Between the death of A and delivery by his executor the sheep are shorn 
or some of the ewes produce lambs. The wool and lambs are the property of B.  
(ii) A bequeaths his Government securities to B, but postpones  the delivery of them till the death of C. The 
interest which falls due between the death of A and the death of C belongs to B, and must, unless he is a minor, be 
paid to him as it is received.  
(iii) The testator bequeaths all his four per cent. Government  promissory notes to A when he shall co mplete the 
age of 18. A, if he c ompletes that age, is entitled to receive the notes, but the interest which accrues in respect of 
them between the testator's death and A ’s completing 18, form part of the residue.  
350. Residuary legatee ’s title to produce of residuary fund. —The legatee under a generalresiduary 
bequest is entitled to the produce of the residuary fund from the testator ’s death.  
Exception .—A general residuary bequest contingent in its terms does not compri se the income which 
may accrue upon the fund bequeathed between the death of the testator and the vesting of the legacy. 
Such income goes as undisposed of.  
Illustrations  
(i) The testator bequeaths the residue of his property to A, a minor, to be paid to hi m when he shall complete the 
age of 18. The income from the testator's death belongs to A.  
(ii) The testator bequeaths the residue of his property to A when he shall complete the age of 18. A, if he 
completes that age, is entitled to receive the residue. T he income which has accrued in respect of it since the 
testator's death goes as undisposed of.  
351. Interest when no time fixed for payment of general legacy. —Where no time has been fixed 
for the payment of a general legacy, interest begins to run from exp iration of one year from the testator's 
death.  
Exception .—(1) Where the legacy is bequeathed in satisfaction of a debt, interest runs from the death 
of the testator.  
(2) Where the testator was a parent or a more remote ancestor of the legatee, or has put himself in the 
place of a parent of the legatee, the legacy shall bear interest from the death of the testator.  
(3) Where a sum is bequeathed to a minor with a direction to pay for his maintenance out of it, 
interest is payable from the death of the testat or. 
352. Interest when time fixed. —Where a time has been fixed for the payment of a general legacy, 
interest begins to run from the time so fixed. The interest up to such time forms part of the residue of the 
testator's estate.  
Exception .—Where the testato r was a parent or a more remote ancestor of the legatee, or has put 
himself in the place of a parent of the legatee and the legatee is a minor, the legacy shall bear interest 
from the death of the testator, unless a specific sum is given by the will for ma intenance, or unless the 
will contains a direction to the contrary.  
353. Rate of interest. —The rate of interest shall be four per cent. per annum in all cases except when 
the testator was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person, in which case it 
shall be six per cent. per annum.  
354. No interest on arrears of annuity within first year after testator's death. —No interest is 
payable on the arrears of an annuity within the first year from the death of the testator, although a period 
earlier than the expiration of that year may have been fixed by will for making the first payment of the 
annuity.  
355. Interest on sum to be invested produce annuity. —Where a sum of money is directed to be 
invested to produce an annuity, interest is payabl e on it from the death of the testator.  
CHAPTER  XII.—Of the Refunding of Legacies  
356. Refund of legacy paid under Court ’s orders. —When an executor or administrator  has paid a 
legacy under the order of a Court, he is entitled to call upon the legatee to re fund in the event of the assets 
proving insufficient to pay all the legacies.  88 357. No refund  if paid voluntarily. —When an executor or administrator has voluntarily paid a 
legacy, he cannot call upon a legatee to refund in the event of the asse ts proving insufficient to pay all the 
legacies.  
358. Refund when legacy has become due on perfor mance of condition within further time 
allowed under section 137. —When the time prescribed by the will for the performance of a condition 
has elapsed, without the condition having been performed, and the executor or administrator has 
thereupon, without fraud, distributed the assets; in such case, if further time has been allowed under 
section 137 for the performance of the condition, and the condition has been p erformed accordingly, the 
legacy cannot be claimed from the executor or administrator, but those to whom he has paid it are liable 
to refund the amount.  
359. When each legatee compellable to refund in proportion. —When the executor or 
administrator has paid  away the assets in legacies, and he is afterwards obliged to discharge a debt of 
which he had no previous notice, he is entitled to call upon each legatee to refund in proportion.  
360. Distribution of assets. —Where an executor or administrator has given s uch notices as the High 
Court may, by any general rule, prescribe or, if no such rule has been made, as the High Court would give 
in an administration -suit, for creditors and others to sent in to him their claims against the state of the 
deceased, he shall , at the expiration of the time therein named for sending in claims, be at liberty to 
distribute the assets, or any part thereof, in discharge of such lawful claims as he knows of, and shall not 
be liable for the assets so distributed to any person of whos e claim he shall not have had notice at the time 
of such distribution:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall prejudice the right of any creditor or claimant to follow 
the assets, or any part thereof, in the hands of the persons who may have received  the same respectively.  
361. Creditor may call upon legatee to refund. —A creditor who has not received payment of his 
debt may call upon a legatee who has received paymeni of his legacy to refund, whether the assets of the 
testator's estate were or were no t sufficient at the time of his death to pay both debts and legacies; and 
whether the payment of the legacy by the executor or administrator was voluntary or not.  
362. When legatee, not satisfied or compelled to refund under section 361, cannot oblige one 
paid in full to refund. —If the assets were sufficient to satisfy all the legacies at the time of the testator's 
death, a legatee who has not received payment of his legacy, or who has been compelled to refund under 
section 361, cannot oblige one who has re ceived payment in full to refund, whether the legacy were paid 
to him with or without suit, although the assets have subsequently become deficient by the wasting of the 
executor.  
363. When unsatisfied legatee must first proceed against executor, if solvent. —If the assets were 
not sufficient to satisfy all the legacies at the time of the testator's death, a legatee who has not received 
payment of his legacy must, before he can call on a satisfied legatee to refund, first proceed against the 
executor o r administrator if he is solvent; but if the executor or administrator is insolvent or not liable to 
pay, the unsatisfied legatee can oblige each satisfied legatee to refund in proportion.  
364. Limit to refunding of one legatee to another. —The refunding of  one legatee to another shall 
not exceed the sum by which the satisfied legacy ought to have been reduced if the estate had been 
properly administered.  
Illustration  
A has bequeathed 240 rupees, to B, 480 rupees to C, and 720 rupees to D. The assets are onl y 1,200 rupees and, 
if properly administered, would give 200 rupees to B, 400 rupees to C and 600 rupees to D. C and D have been paid 
their legacies in full leaving nothing to B. B can oblige C to refund 80 rupees, and D to refund 120 rupees.  89 365. R efunding  to be without interest. —The refunding shall in all cases be without interest.  
366. Residue after usual payments to be paid to residuary legatee. —The surplus or residue of the 
deceased's property, after payment of debts and legacies, shall be  paid to the residuary legatee when any 
has been appointed by th e will. 
367. Transfer of assets from India to executor or administrator in country of domicile for 
distribution. —Where a person not having his domicile in 1[India] has died leaving assets both  in if 
1[India ] and in the country in which he had his domicile at the time of his death, and there has been a 
grant of probate or letters of administration in 1[India ] with respect to the assets there a grant of 
administration in the country of domicile w ith respect to the assets in that country, the executor or 
administrator, as the case may be, in 1[India ], after having given such notices as are mentioned in section 
360, and after having discharged, at the expiration of the time therein named, such lawfu l claims as he 
knows of, may, instead of himself distributing any surplus or residue of the deceased ’s property to 
persons residing out of 1[India]  who are entitled thereto, transfer, with the consent of the executor or 
administrator, as the case may be, in the country of domicile, the surplus or residue to him for distribution 
to those persons.  
CHAPTER  XIII. —Of the Liability of an Executor or Admini strator for Devastation  
368. Liability of executor or administrator for devastation. —When an executor or administrator 
misapplies the estate of the deceased, or subjects it to loss or damage, he is liable to make good the loss or 
damage so occasioned.  
Illustrations  
(i)  The executor pays out of the estate an unfounded claim. He is liable to make good the loss.  
(ii) The deceased had a valuable lease renewable by notice which the executor neglects to give at the proper 
time. The executor is liable to make goo d the loss.  
(iii) The deceased had a lease of less value than the rent payable for it, but terminable on notice at a particular 
time. The executor neglects to give the notice. He is liable to make good the loss.  
369. Liability of executor or administrator for neglect to get any part of property. —When an 
executor or administrator occasions a loss to the estate by neglecting to get in any part of the property of 
the deceased, he is liable to make good the amount.  
Illustrations  
(i) The executor absolutely releases a debt due to the deceased from a solvent person, or compounds with a 
debtor who is able to pay in full. The executor is liable to make good the amount.  
(ii) The executor neglects to sue for a debt till the debtor is able to plead that the claim is barred by limitation 
and the debt is thereby lost to the estate. The executor is liable to make good the amount.  
PART X  
SUCCESSION  CERTIFICATES  
370. Restriction on grant of certificates under this part .—(1) A succession certifica te (hereinafter 
in this Part referred to as a certificate) shall not be granted under this Part with respect to any debt or 
security to which a right is required by section 212 or section 213 to be established by letters of 
administration or probate:  
Provi ded that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prevent the grant of a certificate to 
any person claiming to be entitled to the effects of a deceased Indian Christian, or to any part thereof, 
with respect to any debt or security, by reason th at a right thereto can be established by letters of 
administration under this Act.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for “the States ”. 90 (2) For the  purposes of this Part, “security” means — 
(a) any promissory note, debenture, stock or other security of the Central Govern ment or of a 
State Government;  
(b) any bond, debenture, or annuity charged by Act of Parliament 1[of the United Kingdom] on 
the revenues of India;  
(c)  any stock or debenture of, or share in, a company or other incorporated institution;  
(d) any debenture or other security fo r money issued by, or on behalf of, a local authority;  
(e) any other security which the2[State Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be a security for the purposes of this Part.  
371. Court having jurisdiction to grant certifi cate. —The District Judge within whose jurisdiction 
the deceased ordinarily resided at the time of his death, or, if at that time he had no fixed place of 
residence, the District Judge, within whose jurisdiction any part of the property of the deceased may be 
found, may grant a certificate under this Part.  
 372. Application for certificate. —(1) Application for such a certificate shall be made to the District 
Judge by a petition signed and verified by or on behalf of the applicant in the manner prescribed by the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the signing and verification of a plaint by or on behalf of a 
plaintiff, and setting forth the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the time of the death of the deceased;  
(b) the ordinary residence of the de ceased at the time of his death and, if such residence was not 
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Judge to whom the application is made, then the 
property of the deceased within those limits;  
(c) the family or other near relatives of the de ceased and their respective residences;  
(d) the right in which the petitioner claims;  
(e) the absence of any impediment under section 370 or under any other provision of this Act or 
any other enactment, to the grant of the certificate or to the validity th ereof if it were granted; and  
(f) the debts and securities in respect of which the certificate is applied for.  
(2) If the petition contains any averment which the person verifying it knows or believes to be false, 
or does not believe to be true, that perso n shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 
198 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).  
3[(3) Application for such a certificate may be made in respect of any debt or debts due to the 
deceased creditor or in respect of portions thereo f.] 
373. Procedure on application. —(1) If the District Judge is satisfied that there is ground for 
entertaining the application, he shall fix a day for the hearing thereof and cause notice of the application 
and of the day fixed for the hearing — 
(a) to be served on any person to whom, in the opinion of the Judge, special notice of the 
application should be given, and  
(b) to be posted on some conspicuous part of the court -house and published in such other manner, 
if any, as the Judge, subject to any rules ma de by the High Court in this behalf, thinks fit,  
and upon the day fixed, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, shall proceed to decide in a summary 
manner the right to the certificate.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the A. O. 1950.  
2. The words “G.G. in C ”have been successively amended by the A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
3. Added by Act 14 of 1928, s. 2. 91 (2) When  the Judge decides the right thereto to belong to the applicant, the Judge shall make an order 
for the grant of the certificate to him.  
(3) If the Judge cannot decide the right to the certificate without determining questions of law or fact 
which seem to b e too intricate and difficult for determination in a summary proceeding, he may 
nevertheless grant a certificate to the applicant if he appears to be the person having prima facie the best 
title thereto.  
(4) When there are more applicants than one for a ce rtificate, and it appears to the Judge that more 
than one of such applicants are interested in the estate of the deceased, the Judge may, in deciding to 
whom the certificate is to be granted, have regard to the extent of interest and the fitness in other r espects 
of the applicants.  
374. Contents of certificate. —When  the District Judge grants a certificate, he shall therein specify 
the debts and securities set forth in the application for the certificate, and may thereby empower the 
person to whom the certif icate is granted — 
(a) to receive interest or dividends on, or  
(b) to negotiate or transfer, or  
(c) both to receive interest or dividends on, and to negotiate or transfer, the securities or any of 
them.  
 375.  Requisition of security from grantee of certifi cate. —(1) The District Judge shall in any case 
in which he proposes to proceed under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 373, and may, in any 
other case, require, as a condition precedent to the granting of a certificate, that the person to whom he 
proposes to make the grant shall give to the Judge a bond with one or more surety or sureties, or other 
sufficient security, for rendering an account of debts and securities received by him and for indemnity of 
persons who may be entitled to the whole o r any part of those debts and securities.  
(2) The Judge may, on application made by petitioner and on cause shown to his satisfaction, and 
upon such terms as to security, or providing that the money received be paid into Court, or otherwise, as 
he thinks f it, assign the bond or other security to some proper person, and that person shall thereupon be 
entitled to sue thereon in his own name as if it had been originally given to him instead of to the Judge of 
the Court, and to recover, as trustee for all perso ns interested, such amount as may be recoverable 
thereunder.  
 376. Extension of certificate. —(1) A District Judge may, on the application of the holder of a 
certificate under this Part, extend the certificate to any debt or security not originally specifie d therein, 
and every such extension shall have the same effect as if the debt or security to which the certificate is 
extended had been originally specified therein.  
(2) Upon the extension of a certificate, powers with respect to the receiving of interest or dividends 
on, or the negotiation or transfer of, any security to which the certificate has been extended may be 
conferred, and a bond or further bond or other security for the purposes mentioned in section 375 may be 
required, in the same manner as upon  the original grant of a certificate.  
377. Forms of certificate and extended certificate. —Certificates  shall be granted and extensions of 
certificates shall be made, as nearly as circumstances admit, in the forms set forth in Schedule VIII.  
378. Amendment of certificate in respect of powers as to securities. —Where  a District Judge has 
not conferred on the holder of a certificate any power with respect to a security specified in the certificate, 
or has only empowered him to receive interest or dividends on, or to negotiate or transfer, the security the 
Judge may, on application made by petitioner and on cause shown to his satisfaction, amend the 
certificate by conferring any of the powers mentioned in section 374 or by substituting any one for any 
other of th ose powers.  
379. Mode of collecting court -fees on certificates. —(1) Every application for a certificate or for the 
extension of a certificate shall be accompanied by a deposit of a sum equal to the fee payable under the 
Court -Fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), in  respect of the certificate or extension applied for.  92 (2) If the  application is allowed, the sum deposited by the applicant shall be expended, under the 
direction of the Judge, in the purchase of the stamp to be used for denoting the fee payable as aforesaid.  
(3) Any sum received under sub -section ( 1) and not expended under sub -section ( 2) shall be refunded 
to the person who deposited it.  
380. Local extent of certificate .—A certificate under this Part shall have effect 
throughout  1[India]  2***. 
3[This section shall apply in  3[India]  4after the separation of Burma and Ad en from India to 
certificates granted in Burma and Aden before the date of the separation, or after that date in proceedings 
which were pending at that date.]  
5[It shall also apply in  3[India]  6***7after the separation of Pakistan from India to certificate s granted 
before the date of the separation, or after that date in proceedings pending at that date in any of the 
territories which on that date constituted Pakistan.]  
381. Effect of certificate. —Subject  to the provisions of this Part, the certificate of t he District Judge 
shall, with respect to the debts and securities specified therein, be conclusive as against the persons owing 
such debts or liable on such securities, and shall, not withstanding any contravention of section 370, or 
other defect, afford f ull indemnity to all such persons as regards all payments made, or dealings had, in 
good faith in respect of such debts or securities to or with the person to whom the certificate was granted.  
8[382. Effect of certificate granted or extended by Indian representative in Foreign State and in 
certain other cases .—Where  a certificate in the form, as nearly as circumstances admit, of Schedule 
VIII— 
(a) has been granted to a resident within a foreign State by an Indian representative accredited to 
that State,  or 
(b) has been granted before the commencement of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951 (3 of 1951), 
to a resident within any Part B State by a district judge of that State or has been extended by him in 
such form, or  
(c) has been granted after the commence ment of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951 (3 of 1951), 
to a resident within the State of Jammu and Kashmir by the district judge of that State or has been 
extended by him in such form, the certificate shall, when stamped in accordance with the provisions 
of the Court -Fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), with respect to certificates under this Part, have the same 
effect in India as a certificate granted or extended under this Part.]  
383. Revocation of certificate. —A certificate granted under this Part may be revoked  for any of the 
following causes, namely: — 
(a) that the proceedings to obtain the certificate were defective in substance;  
(b) that the certificate was obtained fraudulently by the making of a false sugges tion, or by the 
concealment from the Court of some thing material to the case;  
                                                      
1. Subs .by Act 3 of 1951,s . 3 and the Schedule, for “the States ”. 
2. The words  “of India ” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
4. 1st April, 1937.  
5.  Added by the A.O. 1948.  
6. The words “of India ” omitted by Act 48 of 1952,s . 3 and Schedule II.  
7. 15th August, 1947.  
8.  Subs . by Act 1957, s. 2 for s . 382 . 93 (c) that  the certificate was obtained by means of an untrue allegation of a fact essential in point of 
law to justify the grant thereof, though such allegation was made in ignorance or inadvertently;  
(d) that the certificate has become useless and inoperative through circumstances;  
(e) that a decree or order made by a competent Court in a suit or other proceeding with respect to 
effects comprising debts or securities specified in the certificate renders it proper t hat the certificate 
should be revoked.  
384. Appeal. —(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, an appeal shall lie to the High Court 
from an order of a District Judge granting, refusing or revoking a certificate under this Part, and the High 
Court may, if it thinks fit, by its order on the appeal, declare the person to whom the certificate should be 
granted and direct the District judge, on application being made therefore, to grant it accordingly, in super 
session of the certificate, if any, alread y granted.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) must be preferred within the time allowed for an appeal under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of1908).  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and to the provisions as to reference to and revisio n by 
the High Court and as to review of judgment of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), as applied 
by section 141  of that Code, an order of a District Judge under this Part shall be final.  
385. Effect on certificate of previous certificate, prob ate or letters of administration. —Save  as 
provided by this Act, a certificate granted thereunder in respect of any of the effects of a deceased person 
shall be invalid if there has been a previous grant of such a certificate or of probate or letters of 
administration in respect of the estate of the deceased person and if such previous grant is in force.  
386. Validation of certain payments made in good faith to holder of invalid certificate. —
Where  a certificate under this Part has been superseded or is inval id by reason of the certificate having 
been revoked under section 383,or by reason of the grant of a certificate to a person named in an appellate 
order under section 384, or by reason of a certificate having been previously granted, or for any other 
cause , all payments made or dealings had, as regards debts and securities specified in the superseded or 
invalid certificate, to or with the holder of that certificate in ignorance of its super session or invalidity, 
shall be held good against claims under any other certificate.  
 387. Effect of decisions under this Act, and liability of holder of certificate thereunder. —
No decision under this Part upon any question of right between any parties shall be held to bar the trial of 
the same question in any suit or in  any other proceeding between the same parties, and nothing in this Part 
shall be construed to affect the liability of any person who may receive the whole or any part of any debt 
or security, or any interest or dividend on any security, to account therefo re to the person lawfully entitled 
thereto.  
 388. Investiture of inferior courts with jurisdiction of District Court for purposes of this Act. —
(1) The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, invest any court inferior in grade to 
a Dis trict Judge with power to exercise the functions of a District Judge under this Part.  
(2) Any inferior court so invested shall, within the local limits of its jurisdiction, have concurrent 
jurisdiction with the District Judge in the exercise of all the pow ers conferred by this Part upon the 
District Judge, and the provisions of this Part relating to the District Judge shall apply to such an inferior 
court as if it were a District Judge:  
Provided that an appeal from any such order of an inferior court as is mentioned in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 384 shall lie to the District Judge, and not to the High Court, and that the District Judge may, if he 
thinks fit, by his order on the appeal, make any such declaration and direction as that sub -section 
authorises th e High Court to make by its order on an appeal from an order of a District Judge.  94 (3) An order  of a District Judge on an appeal from an order of an inferior Court under the last 
foregoing sub -section shall, subject to the provisions as to reference to and revision by the High Court 
and as to review of judgment of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ( 5 of 1908), as applied by  section 
141 of that Code, be final.  
(4) The District Judge may withdraw any proceedings under this Part from an inferior court, and may 
either himself dispose of them or transfer them to another such court established within the l ocal limits of 
the jurisdiction of the District Judge and having authority to dispose of the proceedings.  
(5) A notification under sub -section ( 1) may specify any inferior court specially or any class of such 
courts in any local area.  
(6) Any Civil Court which for any of the purposes of any enactment is subordinate to, or subject to 
the control of, a District Judge shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be a court inferior in 
grade to a District Judge.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act 39 of 1925 .—In the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (Central Act 39 of 
1925) as in force in the St ate of Karnataka, section 388 shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 28 of 1978, s. 4].  
389. Surrender of superseded and invalid certificates. —(1) When a certificate under this Part has 
been superseded or is invalid from any of the causes mentioned in section 386, the holder thereof shall, on 
the requisition of the Court which granted it, deliver it upto that court.  
(2) If he willfully and without reasona ble cause omits so to deliver it up, he shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with both.  
390. Provisions with respect to certificates under Bombay Regulati on VIII of 1827. —
Notwithstanding  anything in Bombay Regulation No. VIII of 1827 the provisions of section 370, sub -
section ( 2), section 372, sub -section ( 1), clause ( f), and sections 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 381, 383, 
384, 387, 388 and 389 with respec t to certificates under this Part and applications therefore, and of 
section 317 with respect to the exhibition of inventories and accounts by executors and administrators, 
shall, so far as they can be made applicable, apply, respectively, to certificates granted under that 
Regulation and applica tions made for certificates thereunder, after the 1st day of May, 1889 and to the 
exhibition of inventories and accounts by the holders of such certificates so granted.  
PART XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
391 Saving .—Nothing in Part VIII, Part IX or Part X shall — 
(i) validate any testamentary disposition which would otherwise have been invalid;  
(ii) invalidate any such disposition which would otherwise have been valid;  
(iii) deprive any person of any right of maintenance to which  he would otherwise have been 
entitled; or  
(iv) affect the Administrator General ’s Act, 1913(3 of 1913).  
 392. [Repeal ed.].—Rep. by the Repealing Act,  1927 (12 of 1927), s. 2 and Schedule .95 SCHEDULE I  
(See section 28)  
TABLE OF CONSANGUINITY  
 
 
 
 
Great 
Grandfather’s 
Father.             
4            
 
Great 
Grandfather.    
 
Great Great 
Uncle.           
3  5          
 
 
Grandfather.    
 
Great 
Uncle.           
2            
 
 
Father    
 
Uncle.     
 
Great Uncle’s son.        
1            
THE PERSON 
WHOSE 
RELATIVES 
ARE TO BE 
RECKONED .   
 
Brother.     
 
Cousin -german.     
 
Second Cousin.     
1            
 
 
Son .       
 
Nephew.     
Son of the 
Cousin -german.     
1            
 
 
Grandson.          
Son of the 
Nephew or 
Brother’s 
Grandson.     
Grandson of 
the Cousin -
german.  
2            
 
Great 
Grandson.             
 96 1[SCHEDULE II 
PART I 
(See section 54)  
(1) Father and mother.  
(2)Brothers and sisters (other than  half brothers and sisters) and lineal descendants of such of them as 
shall have predeceased the intestate.  
(3) Paternal and maternal grandparents.  
(4) Children of paternal and maternal grandparents and the lineal descendants of such of them as have 
predec eased the intestate.  
(5) Paternal and maternal grandparents ’ parents.  
(6) Paternal and maternal grandparents ’ parents ’ children and the lineal descendants of such of them 
as have predeceased the intestate.  
PART II 
(See section 55)  
(1) Father and mother.  
(2) Brothers and sisters (other than half brothers and sisters) and lineal descendants of such of them as 
shall have predeceased the intestate.  
(3) Paternal and maternal grandparents.  
(4) Children of paternal and maternal grandparents and the lineal descenda nts of such of them as have 
predeceased the intestate.  
(5) Paternal and maternal grandparents ’ parents.  
(6) Paternal and maternal 2[grandparent ’s parents  children ] and the lineal descendants of such of them 
as have predeceased the intestate.  
(7) Half brothers and sisters and the lineal descendants of such of them as have predeceased the 
intestate.  
(8) Widows of brothers or half brothers and widowers of sisters or half sisters.  
(9) Paternal or maternal grandparents children ’s widows or widowers.  
(10) Widows or widowers of deceased lineal descendants of the intestate who have not married again 
before the death of the intestate.]  
SCHEDULE III  
[See section 57]  
PROVISIONS OF PART VI APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN WILLS AND CODICILS DESCRIBED IN SECTION 57 
Sections 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 68, 70, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
90, 95, 96, 98, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 3[117], 
119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127 , 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 
140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 
161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178,  179, 180, 181, 
182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189 and 190.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1991, s. 7  for the second Schedule . 
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2001, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “grandparents’ children” (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
3. Ins by Act 21 of 1929, s. 14.  97 Restrictions and modifications in application of foregoing sections  
1. Nothing therein contained shall authorise a testator to bequeath property which he could not have 
alienated inter vivos, or to deprive any persons of any right of maintenance of which, but for the 
application of these sections, he could not deprive them, by will.  
2. Nothing therein contained shall authorise any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina, to create in property 
any intere st which he could not have created before the first day of September, 1870.  
3. Nothing therein contained shall affect any law of adoption or intestate succession,  
4. In applying section 70, the words “than by marriage or ” shall be omitted.  
5. In applying a ny of the following sections, namely, sections seventy -five, seventy -six, one hundred 
and five, one hundred and nine, one hundred and eleven, one hundred and twelve, one hundred and 
thirteen, one hundred and fourteen, one hundred and fifteen, and one hundr ed and sixteen to such wills 
and codicils, the words “son”, “sons”, “child ”, and “children ” shall be deemed to include an adopted 
child; and the word “grand -children ” shall be deemed to include the children, whether adopted or natural -
born, of a child whet her adopted or natural -born; and the expression "daughter -in-law" shall be deemed to 
include the wife of an adopted son.  98 SCHEDULE IV  
[See section 274( 2)] 
FORM OF CERTIFICATE  
I, A. B., Registrar (or as the case may be) of the High Court of J udicature at( or as the case may be) 
hereby certify that on the  day of, the HighCourt  of Judicatureat  (or as the case may be) 
granted probate of the will ( or letters of administration ofthe estate) of C.D., late of  , decreased, to 
E.F. of  and G.H. of, andthat such probate ( or letters) has ( or have) effect over all the property of the 
deceased throughout 1[India] 2***. 
 
SCHEDULE V  
[See section 284(4)]  
FORM OF CAVEAT  
Let nothing be done in the matter of, the estate of A. B., late of  , deceased, whodied on the
 day of  at , without notice to C.D.of  
 
SCHEDULE VI  
(Seesection 289)  
FORM  OF PROBATE  
I, Judge of the District of  [or Delegate appointed for granting probate orletters of administration in 
(here insert the limits of the Delegate ’s jurisdiction )], hereby make knownthat on the  day of  in the 
year , the last will of  , late of  , a copy whereof ishereunto annexed, was proved and registered before 
me, and that administration of the property andcredits of the said deceased, and in any way concerning his  
will was granted to        , the executor inthe said will named, he having undertaken to administer the 
same, and to make a full and true inventory of the said property and credits and exhibit the same in this 
Court within six months from the date of this grant or within such further time as the Court may, from 
time to time, appoint, and  also to render to this Court a true account of the said property and credits 
within one year from the same date, or within such further time as the Court may, from time to time, 
appoint.  
 
SCHEDULE VII  
(See section 290)  
FORM OF LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION  
I,                                 Judge of the District of  [or Delegate appointed for granting probate 
orletters of administration in  (here insert the limits of the Delegate ’s jurisdiction )], hereby 
makeknown that on the  day of  letters of administration (with or without the will annexed, as thecase 
may be), of the property and credits of  , late of  ,deceased, were granted to  , thefather ( or as the 
case may be) of the deceased,  he having undertaken to administer the same and to make a full and true 
inventory of the said property and credits and exhibit the same in this Court, within six months from the 
date of this grant or within such further time as the Court may, from time to  time, appoint, and also to 
render to this Court a true account of the said property and credits within one year from the same date, or 
within such further time as the Court may, from time to time, appoint.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  the Schedule , for “the States ”. 
2. The words “of India ” omitted by the A.O . 1950.  99 SCHEDULE VIII  
(See section 377)  
FORMS OF CERTIFICATE AND EXTENDED  CERTIFICATE  
In the Court of  
To A. B. 
Whereas you applied on the  day of  for a certificate under Part X of the IndianSuccession 
Act, 1925, in respect of the following debts and securities, namely: —  
Debts  
 
Serial  1[Name] of  Amount of debt,  
Number  debtor  including interest, on date  
of application for certificate  Description and date of  
instrument, if any, by  
which the debt is secured  
 
Securities  
DESCRIPTION  
 
 
This certificate is accordingly granted to you and empowers you to collect those debts [ and] [to receive ][interest ] 
[dividends ] [on] [to negotiate ] [to transfer ] [those securities ]. 
Dated this  day of  District Judge  
 
In the Court of  
On the application of A. B. made to me on the         day of  , I hereby extend this 
certificateto the following debts and securities, namely :— 
Debts  
 
Serial Number  Name of debtor  Amount of debt, including interest, on 
date of application for extension  Description and date of 
instrument, if any, by which the 
debt is secured  
 
Securities  
 
  DESCRIPTION    
Serial  Number  Distinguish ing 
number  or letter of 
security  Name, title  or class of  
security  Amount or  par value 
of security  Market -value of 
security  on date of 
application  for 
extension  
 
 
This extension empowers A. B. to collect those debts [ and] [to receive ] [interest ] [dividends ] [on] [tonegotiate ] 
[to transfer ] [those securities ]. 
Dated this  day of  
District Judge.  
 
SCHEDULE IX. —[Enactments repe aled.]. Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1927 (12 of 1927), s. 2 and the  
Schedule . 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule, for “ Number ”. Serial 
Number  Distinguishing 
number or letter of 
security  Name, title or class of security  Amount or par value of 
security  Market -value of security 
on date of application for 
certificate  
1 
 THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1971  
 Last Updated 18 -3-2020  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Appointment of estate officers.  
3A. Eviction from temporary occupation.  
3B.  Eviction from residential accommodation.  
4. Issue of notice to show cause against order of eviction.  
5. Eviction of unauthorised occupants.  
5A. Power to remove unauthorised constructions, etc.  
5B. Order of demolit ion of unauthorised construction.  
5C. Power to seal unauthorised constructions.  
6. Disposal of property left on public premises by unauthorised occupants.  
7. Power to require payment of rent or damages in respect of public premises.  
8. Powers of estate officers.  
9. Appeals.  
10. Finality of orders.  
11. Offences and penalty.  
11A. Offences under section 11 to be cognizable.  
12. Power to obtain information.  
13. Liability of heirs and legal representatives.  
14. Recovery of rent, etc., as an arrear of land re venue.  
15. Bar of jurisdiction.  
16. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
17. Delegation of powers.  
18. Power to make rules.  
19. Repeal.  
20. Validation.  
  2 
 THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UN AUTHORISED  
OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1971  
[23rd August , 1971.]  
An Act to provide for the eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises and for 
certain incidental matters.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Public Premises 
(Eviction of Una uthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of September, 1958 except sections 11, 
19 and 20 which shall com e into force at once.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(b) “estate officer ” means an officer appointed as such by the Cent ral Government under  
section 3;  
(c) “premises ” means any land or any building or part of a building and incl udes, — 
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such buil ding or part of a 
building, and  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for the mor e beneficial 
enjoyment thereof;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by  rules made under this Act;  
 2[(e) “public premises” means — 
(1) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease or requisitioned by, or on behalf of the 
Central Government, and includes any such premises which have been placed by that 
Government, whether before or after the commencement of the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unau thorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 1980  (61 of 1980) under the control of the Secretariat 
of either House  of Parliament for providing residential accommodation to any member of the staff 
of that Secretariat;  
(2) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf of, — 
(i) any company as defined in section 3  of the  3[the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)], 
in which not less than fifty -one per cent . of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central 
Government or any company which is a subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act)  of the 
first-mentioned company;  
(ii) any corporation (not being a compan y as defined in section 3 of the  3[the Companies 
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)], or a local authority) established by or under a Central Act and 
owned or contr olled by the Central Government;  
4[(iii) any company as defined in clause ( 20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013  
(18 of 2013) in which not less than fifty -one per cent . of the paid up capital is held partly by 
the Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments and includes a 
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-12-1980).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2, for “the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ” (w.e.f. 22-6-2015 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for item ( iii) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 3 
 company which is a subsidiary (wit hin the meaning of that Act) of the first -mentioned 
company and which carries on the business of public transport including metro railway.  
Expla nation .—For the purposes of this item, “metro railway” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Metro 
Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002 (60 of 2002);  
(iiia) any University established or i ncorporated by any Central Act ,]; 
(iv) any Institute incorporated by the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961                            
(59 of 1961) ; 
1[(v) any Board of Trustees or any successor company constituted under or referred to 
in the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) ;] 
(vi) the Bhakra Management Board constituted under section 79 of the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966  (31 of 1966) , and that Board as and when re -named as the 
Bhakra -Beas Management Board under sub -section  (6) of section 80 of that Act , 2***. 
3[(vii) any State Government or the Government of any Union territory situated in the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi or in any other Union territory,  
(viii) any Cantonment Board constituted under the Cantonments Act, 1924                
(2 of 1924) ; and]  
(3) in relation to the 4[Nationa l Capital Territory of Delhi], — 
(i) any premises belonging to the  5[Council as defined in clause ( 9) of section 2 of the 
New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994) or Corporation or Corporations 
notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957          
(66 of 1957),] of Delhi, or any Municipal Committee or notified area committee,   2*** 
(ii) any premises belonging to the Delhi Development Authority, whether such premises 
are in the possession of, or leased out by, the said Authority;]  6[and],  
7[(iii) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease or requisitioned by, or on behalf of 
any State Go vernment or  the Government of any Union Territory, ] 
8[(iv) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf of any Government 
company as defined in  clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “State Government” 
occurring in clause ( 45) of the said section shall mean the Government of the National 
Capital Territory of D elhi;] 
9[(4) any premises of the enemy  property as defined in clause ( c) of section 2  of the 
Enemy Property Act, 1968 (34 of 1968) .] 
(f) “rent”, in relation to any public premises, means the consideration payable periodically for the 
authorised occupation  of the premises, and includes — 
(i) any charge for electricity, water or any other services in connection with the occupation of 
the premises,  
(ii) any tax (by whatever name called) paya ble in respect of the premises,  
where such charge or tax is payable by the Central Government or the 10[statutory  authority ]; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2, for item ( v) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
2. The word “and” omitted by Act 7 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2, for “Municipal Corporation” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
6. The word  “and”  added by  Act 7 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
7. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-1994).  
8. Ins. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
9. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017, s. 20 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016).  
10. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2, for “corporate authority ” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  4 
 1[(fa) “residential accommodation occupation" in relation to any public premises means occupation by any 
person on grant of licence to him to occupy such premises on the basis of an order of allotment for a fixed 
tenure or for a period he holds office, in accordance with the rules and instructions issued in this regard, made 
under the authority of the Central Government, a State Government, a Union territory Adminis tration or a 
statutory authority, as the case may be;]  
2[ 3[(fb)] “statutory authority”, in relation to the public premises referred to in clau se (e) of this section, 
means, — 
(i) in respect of the public premises placed under the control of the Secretariat  of either House of 
Parliament, the Secretariat of the concerned House of Parliament,  
(ii) in respect of the public premises referred to in item ( i) of sub -clause ( 2) 4[and in item ( iv) of           
sub-clause ( 3)] of that clause, the company or the subsidiary company, as the case may be, referred to 
therein,  
(iii) in respect of the public premises referred to in item ( ii) of sub -clause ( 2) of that clause, the 
corporation referred to therein,  
(iv) in respect of the public premises referred to, respect ively, in items ( iii), (iv), (v) and ( vi) of         
sub-clause ( 2) of that clause, the University, Institute or Board, as the case may be , referred to therein, and  
(v) in respect of the public premises referred to in sub -clause ( 3) of that clause , the 5[Council, 
Corporation or Corporations], Committee or Authority, as the case may be, referred to in that  
sub-clause;]  
6[ 7[(fc)] “temporary occupation” in relation to any public premises, means occupation by any person on the 
the basis of an order of allotment made under the authority of the Central Government, a State Government, the 
Government of a Union territory or a statutory auth ority for a total period (including the extended period, if 
any) which is less than thirty days;]  
(g) “unauthorised occupation”, in relation to any public premises, means the occupation by any person of 
the public premises without authority for such occupa tion, and includes the continuance in occupation by any 
person of the public premises after the authority (whether by way of grant or any other mode of transfer) under 
which he was allowed to occupy the premises has expired or has been determined for any r eason whatsoever.  
3. Appointment of estate officers .—The Central Government may, by notifica tion in the Offi cial 
Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons, being gazetted officers of Government  8[or of the Government of any Union 
Territory] or officers of equivalent rank of the  9[statutory authority], as it thinks fit, to be estate officers for 
the purposes of this Act;  10*** 
11[Provided that no officer of the Secretariat of the Rajya Sabha shall be so appointed except after 
consultation with the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and no officer of the Secretariat of the Lok Sabha shall 
be so appointed except after consultation wi th the Speaker of the Lok Sabha:  
Provided further that an officer of a statutory authority shall only be appointed as an estate officer in 
respect of the public premises controlled by that authority; 12***] 
13[Provided also that the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant Custodian of the  enemy property 
appointed under  section 3  of the Enemy Property Act, 1968  (34 of 1968),  shall be deemed to have been 
appointed as the Estate Officer in respect of those enemy property, being the public premises, referred to in 
sub-clause ( 4) of clause ( e) of section 2  of this Act for which they had been appointed as the Custodian, 
Deputy Custodian and Assistant Custodian under  section 3  of the Enemy Property Act, 1968.]  
(b) define the local limits within which, or the categories of public premises in respec t of which, the 
estate officers shall exercise the powers conferred, and perform the duties imposed, on estate officers by or 
under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2019).  
2. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Clause ( fa) renumbered as clause ( fb) by Act 36 to 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2019).  
4. Ins. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-6-2015 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
6. Ins. by Act 7 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
7. Clause ( fb) renumbered as clause (fc) by Act 36 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2019).  
8. Ins. by  Act 7 of 1994, s. 3 (1 -6-1994).  
9. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2, for “corporate authority” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
10. The word “and” omitted by  s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
11. Provisos a dded by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
12. The word “and” omitted by Act 3 of 2017, s. 20 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016).  
13. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016).  5 
 1[3A. Eviction from temporary occupation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4 or 
section 5, if the es tate officer, after making such inquiry as he deems expedient in the circumstances of 
the case, is satisfied that any persons who were allowed temporary occupation of any public premises are 
in unauthorised occupation of the said premises, he may, for reas ons to be recorded in writing, make an 
order for the eviction of such persons forthwith and, thereupon, if such persons refuse or fail to comply 
with the said order of eviction, he may evict them from the premises and take possession there of and may, 
for that purpose, use such force as may be necessary.]  
2[3B.  Eviction from residential accommodation .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 4 or section 5, if the estate officer has information that any person, who was granted residential 
accommodation occupation, is in unauthorised occupation of the said resid ential accommodation, he 
shall — 
(a) forthwith issue notice in writing calling upon such person to show cause within a period of 
three working days why an order of eviction should not be made;  
(b) cause the notice to be served by having it affixed on the outer door or some other conspicuous 
part of the said residential accommodation, and in such other manner as may be prescribed, 
whereupon the notice shall be deemed to have been served upon such person.  
(2) The estate officer shall, after considering the cause, if any, shown by the person on whom the 
notice is served under sub -section ( 1) and after making such inquiry as it deems expedient in the 
circumstances of the case, for reasons to  be recorded in writing, make an order of eviction of such person.  
(3) If the person in unauthorised occupation refuses or fails to comply with the order of eviction 
referred to in sub -section ( 2), the estate officer may evict such person from the resident ial accommodation 
and take possession thereof and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be necessary.]  
4. Issue of notice to sho w cause against order  of eviction .—3[(1) If the estate officer has 
information that any person is in unauthorised occupation of any public premises and that he should be 
evicted, the estate officer shall issue in the manner hereinafter provided a notice in writing within seven 
working days from the date of receipt of the information regarding the unauthorised occupati on calling 
upon the person concerned to show cause why an order of eviction should not be made.  
(1A) If the estate officer knows or has reasons to believe that any person is in unauthorised occupation 
of the public premises, then, without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall forthwith 
issue a notice in writing calling upon the person concerned to show cause why an order of eviction should 
not be made.  
(1B) Any delay in issuing a notice referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 1A) shall not v itiate the 
proceedings under this Act.]  
(2) The notice shall — 
(a) specify the grounds on which the order of evict ion is proposed to be made; and  
4[(b) require all persons concerned, that is to say, all persons who are, or may be, in occupation 
of, or claim  interest in, the public premises, — 
(i) to show cause, if any, against the proposed order on or before such date as is specified in 
the notice, being a date not 5[later than] seven days from the date of issue thereof, and  
(ii) to appear before the estate o fficer on the date specified in the notice along with the 
evidence which they intend to produce in support of the cause shown, and also for personal 
hearin g, if such hearing is desired.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 1994, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
2.  Ins. by Act 36 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2019).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 22 -6-215). 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 4, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 3, for “earlier than” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 6 
 (3) The estate officer shall cause the notice to be served by having it affixed on the outer door or 
some other conspicuous part of the public premises, and in such other manner as may be prescribed, 
whereupon the notice shall be deemed to have been duly given to all persons concerned.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
5. Evic tion of unauthorised occupants .—2[(1) If, after considering the cause, if any, shown by any 
person in pursuance of a notice under section 4 and any evidence produced by him in support of the same 
and after personal hearing, if any, given under sub -clause ( ii) of c lause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4, 
the estate officer is satisfied that the public premises are in unauthorised occupation, the estate officer 
shall make an order of eviction, for reasons to be recorded therein, directing that the public premises s hall 
be vacated, on such date as may be specified in the order but not later than fifteen days from the date of 
the order, by all persons who may be in occupation thereof or any part thereof, and cause a copy of the 
order to be affixed on the outer door or  some other conspicuous part of the public premises:  
Provided that every order under this sub -section shall be made by the estate officer as expeditiously 
as possible and all endeavour shall be made by him to issue the order within fifteen days of the date  
specified in the notice under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A), as the case may be, of section 4.]  
(2) If any person refuse s or fails to comply with the order of eviction  3[on or before the date specified 
in the said order or within fifteen days of  the date of its publication under sub -section ( 1), whichever is 
later,] the estate officer or any other officer duly authorised by the estate officer in this behalf 4[may after 
the date so specified or after  the expiry of the period afore said, whichever i s later, evict that person]  from, 
and take possession of, the public premises and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be 
necessary.  
5[Provided that if the estate officer is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that there exists 
any compelling reason which prevents the person from vacating the premises within fifteen days, the 
estate officer may grant another fifteen days from the date of expiry of the order under sub -section ( 1) to 
the person to vacate the premises.]  
6[5A. power to remove unauthorised constructions, etc .—(1) No person shall — 
(a) erect or place or raise any building or  7[any movable or  immovable structure or fixture ] 
(b) display or spread any goods,  
(c) bring or keep any cattle or other animal,  
on, or against, or in front of, any public premises except in accordance with the authority (whether by 
way of grant or any other mode of transfer) under which he was allowed to occupy such premises.  
8[(2) Where any building or other immovable structure or fixture has been erec ted, placed or raised on 
on any public premises in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the estate officer may serve 
upon the person erecting such building or other structure or fixture, a notice requiring him either to 
remove, or to show cause  why he shall not remove such building  or other structure or fixture from the 
public premises within such period, not being less than seven days, as he may specify in the notice; and 
on the omission or refusal of such person either to show cause , or to rem ove such building or other 
structure or fixture from the public premises , or where the cause shown is not, in the opinion of the estate 
officer, sufficient, the estate officer may , by order, remove or cause to be removed the building or other 
structure or fixture from the public premises and recover the cost of such removal from the person 
aforesaid as an arrear of land revenue.  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by Act 7 of 1994, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “may evict that person” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
5. Ins. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
6. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 6 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
7. Subs. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 2, for “other struc ture or fixture” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
8. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  7 
 (3) Where any movable structure or fixture has been erected, placed or raised, or any goods have been 
displayed or spread, or any cattle or other animal has been brought or kept, on any public premises, in 
contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) by any person, the estate officer  may, by order, remove 
or cause to be removed without notice, such structure, fixture, goods, ca ttle or other animal, as the case 
may be, from the public premises and recover the cost of such removal from such person as an arrear of 
land revenue.]  
5B. Order of demoliti on of unauthorised construction .—(1) Where the erection of any build ing or 
execution of any work has been commenced, or is being carried on, or has been completed, on any public 
premises by any person in occupation of such  public premises under an authority (whether by way of 
grant or any other mode of transfer), and such erectio n of building or ex ecution of work is in 
contraven tion of, or not authorised by , such authority, then, the estate officer may, in addition to any other 
action that may be taken under this Act or in accordance with the terms of the authority aforesaid, make  
an order, for reasons to be recorded therein, directing that such erection or work shall be demolished by 
the person at whose instance the erection or work has been commenced, or is being carried on, or has 
been completed, within such period, a s may be sp ecified in the order 1*** 
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made unless the person concerned has been 
given, by means of a notice  2[of not less than seven days] served in the prescribed manner, a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause  why such order should not be made.  
(2) Where the erection or work has not been completed, the estate officer may, by the same order or 
by a separate order, whether made at the time of the issue of the notice under the proviso to  
sub-section ( 1) or at an y other time , direct the person at whose instance the erection or work has been 
commenced, or is being carried on, to stop the erection or work until the expiry of the period within 
which an appeal against the order of demolition, if made, may be preferre d under section 9.  
(3) The estate officer shall cause every order made under sub -section ( 1), or, as the case may be, 
under sub -section ( 2), to be affixed on the outer door, or some other conspicuous part, of the public 
premises.  
(4) Where no appeal has been preferred against the order of demolition made by the estate officer 
under sub -section ( 1) or where an order of demolition made by the estate officer under that sub -section 
has been confirmed on appeal, whether with or without variation, the person ag ainst whom the order has 
been made shall comply with the order within the period specified therein, or, as the case may be, within 
the period, if any, fixed by the appellate officer on appeal, and, on the failure of the person to comply with 
the order with in such period, the estate officer or any other officer duly authorised by the estate officer in 
this behalf, may cause the erection or work to which the order relates to be demolished.  
(5) Where an erection or work has been demolished, the estate officer may, by order, require the 
person concerned to pay the expenses of such demolition within such time, and in such number of 
instalments, as may be specified in the order.]  
3[5C. Power to s eal unauthorised constructions .—(1) It shall be lawful for the estate  officer, at any 
time, before or after making an order of demolition under section 5B, to make an order directing the 
sealing of such erection or work or of the public premises in which such erection or work has been 
commenced or is being carried on or has  been completed in such manner as may be prescribed, for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, or for preventing any dispute as to the nature and e xtent 
of such erection or work.  
(2) Where any erection or work or any premises in which any  erection or work is being carried on 
has, or have been sealed, the estate officer may, for the purpose of demolishing such erection or work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act,  order such seal to be removed.  
(3) No person shall  remove such seal except — 
                                                           
1. Certain words, brackets and figure omitted by Act 35 of 1984 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
3. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  8 
 (a) under an order made by the estate off icer under sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) under an order of the appellate officer made in an appeal under this Act.]  
6. Disposal of property left on public prem ises by unauthorised occupants .—(1) Where any 
persons have been evicted from any pu blic premises under section 5 1[or where any building or other 
work has been demolished under section 5B], the estate officer m ay, after giving fourteen days’ notice to 
the persons from whom possession of the public premises ha s been taken and after publishing the notice 
in at least one newspaper having circulation in the locality, remove or cause to be removed or dispose of 
by public auction any prope rty remaining on such premises.  
1[(1A) Where any goods, materials, cattle or o ther animal have been removed from any public 
premises under section 5A, the estate officer may, after giving fourteen days' notice to the persons owning 
such goods, materials, cattle or other animal and after publishing the notice in at least one newspape r 
having circulation in the locality, dispose of, by public auction, such goods, mat erials, cattle or other 
animal.  
(1B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) and ( 1A), the giving or publication of any 
notice referred to therein shall not be necessary in respect of any property which is subject to speedy and 
natural decay, and the estate officer may, after recording such evidence as he may think fit, cause such 
propert y to be sold or otherwise disposed of in such manner as he may think fit.]  
(2) Where any property is sold under sub -section ( 1), the sale proceeds thereof shall, after deducting 
the expenses of the sale and the amount, if any, due to the Central Governmen t or the 2[statutory 
authority] on account of arrears of rent or damages or costs, be paid to such person or persons as may 
appear to the estate officer to be entitled to the same:  
Provided that where the estate officer is unable to decide as to the person  or persons to whom the 
balance of the amount is payable or as to the apportionment of the same, he may refer such dispute to the 
civil court of competent jurisdiction and the decision of th e court thereon shall be final.  
1[(2A) The expression “costs ”, referred to in sub -section ( 2), shall include the cost of removal 
recoverable under section 5A and the cost of demolition recoverable under section 5B.]  
7. Power to require payment of rent or damages  in respect of public premises .—(1) Where any 
person is in arrears of rent payable in respect of any public premises, the estate officer may, by order, 
require that person to pay the same within such time and in such instalments as  may be specified in the 
order.  
(2) Where any person is, or has at any time been, in  unauthorised occupation of any public premises, 
the estate officer may, having regard to such principles of assessment of damages as may be prescribed, 
assess the damages on account of the use and occupation of such premises and may, by order, require tha t 
person to pay the damages within such time and in such instalments as may be specified in the order.  
3[(2A) While making an orde r under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the estate officer may direct 
that the arrears of rent or, as the case may be, dam ages shall be payable together with 4[compound 
interest ] at such rate as may be prescribed, not being a rate exceeding the current rate of interest within 
the meaning of the In terest Act, 1978 (14 of 1978).]  
(3) No order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -sectio n (2) shall be made against any person until after the 
issue of a notice in writing to the person calling upon him to show cause 5[within seven days from the 
date of issue thereof] , why such order should not be made, and until his objections, if any, and a ny 
evidence he may produce in support of the same, have been considered by the estate officer.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 7 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “ corporate authority” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 5, for “simple interest” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 9 
 1[(3A) If the person in unauthorised occupation of residential accommodation challenges the eviction 
order passed by the estate officer under sub -section ( 2) of section 3B in any court, he shall pay damages 
for every month for the residential accommodation held by him.]  
2 [(4) Every order under this section shall be made by the estate officer as expeditiously as possible 
and all endeavour shall be made by him to i ssue the order within fifteen days of the date specified in the 
notice.]  
8. Powers of estate officers .—An estate officer shall, for the purpose of holding any inquiry under 
this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civ il Procedure, 1908  
(5 of 1908) when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
9. Appeals .—(1) An appeal shall lie from every order of the estate officer made in respect  of any 
public premises under 3[section 5 or section 5B] 4[or section 5C] or section 7 to an appellate officer who 
shall be the district judge of the district in which the public premises are situate or such other judicial 
officer in that distr ict of not less than ten years standing as the district judge may designate in this behalf.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be pre ferred, — 
(a) in the case of an appeal f rom an order under section 5, 5[within twelve days] from the date of 
publication of the order under sub -section ( 1) of that section; 6*** 
(b) in the ca se of an appeal from an order 7[under section 5B or section 7, within twelve days] 
from the date on which the order is communicated to the appellant; 8[and]  
4[(c) in the case of an appeal from an order under section 5C, within twelve day s from the date of 
such order:]  
9[Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal  in exceptional cases after the expiry 
of the  said period , if he is satisfied  for reasons to be recorded in writing that there was compelling 
reasons which prevented the  person from filing the  appeal in time .] 
(3) Where an appeal is preferred from an order of the estate officer, the appellate officer may stay 
the enforcement of that order for such period and on such conditions a s he deems fit:  
10[Provided that where the construction or erection of any building or  other structure or fixture or 
execution of any other work was not completed on the day on which an order was made under section 5B 
for the demolition or removal of such building or other structure or fixture, the appellate officer shall not 
make any order  for the stay of enforcement of such order, unless such security, as may be sufficient in the 
opinion of the appellate officer, has been given by the appellant for not proceeding with such 
construction, erection or work pendi ng the disposal of the appeal.]  
11[(4) Every appeal under this section shall be disposed of by the appellate officer as expeditiously as 
possible and every endeavour shall be made to dispose of the appeal finally within one month from the 
date of filing the appeal, after providing the pa rties an opportunity of being heard.]  
(5) The costs of any appeal under this section shall be in the discr etion of the appellate officer.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2019).  
2. Ins. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015)  
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 9, for “section 5” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 9, for “within fifteen days” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
6. The word “and” omitted by Act 35 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
7. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 9, for “under section 7, within fifteen d ays” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
8. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
9. Ins. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015).  
10. The proviso added by Act 61 of 1980, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980) . 
11. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 6, for sub -section (4) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015).  10 
 (6) For the purposes of this section, a presidency -town shall be deemed to be a district and the chief 
judge or the pr incipal judge of the city civil court therein shall be deemed to be the district judge of the 
district.  
10. Finality of orders .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made by an 
estate officer or appellate officer under this Act shall be final and shall not be called in question in any 
original suit, application or execution proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferre d by or under 
this Act.  
11. Offences and penalty .—1[(1) If any person unlawfully occupies any public premises, he shall be 
be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to fiv e thousand rupees,  or with both : 
Provided that a person who, having been lawfully in occupation of any public premises by virtue of 
any authority (whether by way of grant, allotment or by any other mode whatsoever) continues to be in 
occupation of such premises after such a uthority has ceased to be valid, shall not be guilty of such 
offence.]  
2[(2)] If any person who has been evicted from any public premises under this Act again occupies the 
premises without authority for such occupation, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to  3[five thousand rupees ], or with both.  
 2[(3)] Any magistrate convicting a person under  4[sub-section ( 2)] may make an order for evicting 
that person summarily and he sh all be liable to such eviction without prejudice to any other action that 
may be taken against him under this Act.  
5[11A. Offences und er section 11 to be cognizable .—The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974), shall apply to an offence under section  11 as if it were a cognizable  offence — 
(i) for the purposes of inv estigation of such offence, and  
(ii) for the pu rposes of matters, other than — 
(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and  
(2) arrest of a person except on the complaint of, or upon information received  
from,— 
(a) a Group A officer as may be appointed by the Central Government, in the case of an 
offence in relation to the public premises specified in sub -clause (1) of clause ( e) of section 2;  
(b) an officer equivalent to the rank of a Group A officer of the Central Government or 
where it is not possible to specify an officer of such equivalent rank, such executive officer as 
may be appointed by the statutory authority in the cas e of an offence in relation to the public 
premises specified in sub -clause ( 2) of clause ( e) of section 2;  
(c) such Deputy Commissioner, in the case of an offence in relation to the public 
premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, as may be  appointed by the 
Administrator o f the Union territory of Delhi;  
(d) the Secretary, New Delhi Municipal Committee, in the case of an offence in relation 
to the public premises belonging to the  New Delhi Municipal Committee;  
(e) the Secretary of a notified area committee, in the case of an offence in relation to the 
public premises belo nging to that committee;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 6 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
2. Sub -section s (1) and ( 2) renumbered as sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) thereof by s.6, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 7 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  11 
 (f) such Director, in the case of an offence in relation to the public premises belonging to 
the Delhi Development Authority, as may be appointed by t he Administrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi.]  
12. Power to obtain informatio n.—If the estate officer has reason to believe that any persons are in 
unauthorised occupation of any public premises, the estate officer or any other officer authorised by hi m 
in this behalf may require those persons or any other person to furnish information relating to the names 
and other particulars of the persons in occupation of the public premises and every person so required 
shall be bound to furnish the information in his possession.  
13. Liability of h eirs and legal representatives .—(1) Where any person against whom any 
proceeding for the determination of arrears of rent or for the assessment of damages 1[or for the 
determination of the amount payable by way of interest on such arrears of rent or damages] is to be or has 
been taken dies before the proceeding is taken or during the pendency thereof, the proceeding may be 
taken or, as the case may be, contin ued against the heirs or legal representatives of that person.  
1[(1A) Where any person from whom any cost of removal of any building or other structure or f ixture, 
or, as the case may be,  any goods, cattle or other animal is to be re covered under sub -section (2) 2[or sub -
section ( 3)] of section 5A, or any expenses of demolition are to be recovered under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 5B, dies before any proceeding is taken for the recovery of such cost or during the pendency 
thereof, the proceeding may be taken  or, as the case may be, continued against the heirs or legal 
representatives of that person.]  
(2) Any amount due to the Central Government or t he 3[statutory authority] from any person  whether 
by way of arrears of 4[rent or damages or costs of removal ref erred to in section 5A or expenses of  
demolition referred to in section 5B or interest referred to in sub - section ( 2A) of section 7 or any other 
cost] shall, after the death of the person, be payable by his heirs or legal representatives but their liabil ity 
shall be limited to the extent of the assets of the deceased in their hands.  
14. Recovery of rent, etc. , as an arrear of land revenue .—If any p erson refuses or fails to pay 5[the 
5[the expenses of demolition payable under sub -section ( 5) of section 5B or] the arrears of rent payable 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 or  the damages payable under sub -section ( 2) 5[or the interest 
determined under sub -section ( 2A)] of that section or the costs awarded to the Central Government or the  
3[statutory authority] u nder sub -section ( 5) of section 9 or any 6[portion of such rent, damages, expenses, 
interest] or costs, within the time, if any, specified therefor in the order relating thereto, the estate officer 
may issue a certificate for the amount due to the Collecto r who shall proceed to recover the same as an 
arrear of land revenue.  
7[15. Bar of jurisdiction. —No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any sui t or proceeding in 
respect of — 
(a) the eviction of any person who is in unauthorised occupa tion of any public premises, or  
(b) the removal of any building, structure or fixture or goods, cattle or other animal from any 
public premises under secti on 5A, or  
(c) the demolition of any building or other structure made, or ordered to be made, under section 
5B, or   
8[(cc) the sealing of any erection or work or of any public  premises under section 5C, or]  
(d) the arrears of rent payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 or damages payable under  
sub-section ( 2), or interest payable under sub -section ( 2A), of that s ection, or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 10 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 3-11-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2, for “corporate authority” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
4. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “rent or damages or costs”  (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
5. Ins. by s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
6. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “portion of such rent, damages” (w.e.f. 20-12-1980).  
7. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
8. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 3-11-1984).  12 
 (e) the recovery of — 
(i) costs of removal of any building, structure or fixture or goods, cattle or other animal under 
section 5A, o r 
(ii) expenses of demolition under section 5B, or  
(iii) costs awarded to the Central Government or statutory authority under s ub-section ( 5) of 
section 9, or  
(iv) any portion of such rent, damages, costs of removal, expenses of demolition or costs 
awarded to the Central Government or the statutory authority.]  
16. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit,  prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the 1[statutory authority] or the appellate officer or the estate officer 
in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of 
any rules or orders made thereunder.  
17. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, subject to such conditions if any, as may be 
specified in the notification be exercisable also by a State Government or an officer of the State 
Government or an officer of the State Government.  
18. Pow er to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carr ying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of any notice required or authorised to be given und er this Act and the ma nner in 
which it may be served;  
(b) the holdi ng of inquiries under this Act;  
(c) the distribution and allocation of work to estate officers and the transfer of any proceeding 
pending before an estate off icer to another estate officer;  
(d) the procedure to be followed in taking  possession of public premises;  
(e) the manner in which damages for unauthorised occupation may be assessed and the principles 
which may be taken into acc ount in assessing such damages;  
2[(ee) the manner in which the sealing of any erection or work or of any public premises shall be 
made under s ub-section ( 1) of section 5 C;] 
3[(ea) the rate at which interest shall be payable on arrear s of rent specifi ed in any order made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, or damag es assessed under su b-section ( 2) of that section;]  
(f) the manner in which appeals may be preferred and the procedure to be followed in appeals;  
(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be lai d, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may b e comprised in one 
session or 4[in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2, for “corporate authority” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 3-11-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 13 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
4. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  13 
 19. Repeal .—The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1958 (3 2 of 1958), is 
hereby repealed.  
20. Validation .—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, anything done or any 
action taken (including rules or orders made, notices issued, evictions ordered or effected, damages 
assessed, rents or damages or costs recovered and proceedings initiated) o r purported to have been done 
or taken under the public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1958 (32 of 1958) 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the 1958 -Act) shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if 
such thing or action was  done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act which, under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 1 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of Sep tember, 1958, 
and accordingly — 
(a) no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund 
of any rent or damages or costs recovered under the 1958 -Act where such refund has been claimed 
merely on the ground that the said Act has been declared to be  unconstitutional and void; and  
(b) no court shall enforc e a decree or order directing the refund of any rent or damages or costs 
recovered under the 1958 -Act merely on the ground that the said Act has been declared to be 
unconstitutional and void.  
1 
 THE COMMISSION OF SATI (PREVENTION) ACT, 1987  
________  
ARRANGEMENT  OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
PART  II 
PUNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES RELATING TO SATI  
3. Attempt to commit sati. 
4. Abetment of sati. 
5. Punishment for glorification of sati. 
PART  III 
POWERS  OF COLLECTOR  OR DISTRICT  MAGISTRATE  TO PREVENT  OFFENCES  RELATING TO SATI  
6. Power to prohibit certain acts.  
7. Power to remove certain temples or other structures.  
8. Power to seize certain properties.  
PART  IV 
SPECIAL  COURTS  
9. Trial of offences under this Act . 
10. Special Public Prosecutors . 
11. Procedure and powers of Special Courts . 
12. Power of Special Court with respect to other offences . 
13. Forfeiture of funds or property . 
14. Appeal . 
PART  V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Protection of action taken under this Act . 
16. Burden of proof . 
17. Obligation of certain persons to report about the commission of offence under this Act . 
18. Person convicted of an offence under section 4 to be disqualified from inheriting certain 
properties.  
19. [Repealed. ] 
20. Act to have overriding effect . 
21. Power to make rules.  
22. Repeal of existing laws . 
 
  2 
 THE COMMISSION OF SATI (PREVENTION) ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1988  
[3rd January , 1988 .] 
An Act to provide for the more effective prevention of the commission of sati and its 
glorification and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto , 
WHEREAS  sati or the burning or burying alive of widows or women is revolting to the feelings of 
human nature and is nowhere enjoined by any of the religions of India as an im perative duty;  
ANDWHEREAS  it is necessary to take more effective measures to prevent the commission of sati and 
its glorification;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Commis sion of Sati 
(Prevention) Act, 1987.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(b) “glorification ”, in relation to sati, whether such sati, was committed before or after the 
commencement of this Act,  includes, among other things, — 
(i) the observance of any ceremony or the taking out of a procession in connection with the 
commission of sati; or 
(ii) the supporting, justifying or propagating the practice of sati in any manner; or  
(iii) the arranging  of any function to eulogise the person who has committed sati; or 
(iv) the creation of a trust, or the collection of funds, or the construction of a temple or other 
structure or the  carrying on of any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony thereat, 
with a view to perpetuate the honour  of, or to preserve the memory of, a person who has 
committed sati; 
(c) “sati” means the act of burning or burying alive of — 
(i) any  widow along with the body of her deceased husband or any other relative or with any 
article, object or thing associated with the husband or such relative; or  
(ii) any woman along with the body of any of her relatives, irrespective of whether such 
burning or burying is claimed to be voluntary on the part of the widow or the woman or 
otherwise;  
(d) “Special Court ” means a Special Court constituted under section 9;  
(e)  “temple” includes any building or other structure, whether roofed or not, con structed or made 
to preserve the memory of a person in respect of whom sati has been committed or used or intended 
to be used for the carrying on of any form of worship or for the observance of any ceremony in 
connection with such commis sion.  
                                                           
1. 21stMarch , 198 8, vide notification No. G.S.R. 359(E), dated 21st March , 198 8, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 3 
 (2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 
of 1860), or in the Code shall have the same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the Indian 
Penal Code or the Code.  
PART  II 
PUNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES RELATING  TO SATI  
3. Attempt to commit sati.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860) , whoever attempts to commit sati and does any act towards such commission shall be punishable  
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both:  
Provided that the Special Court trying an offence under this section shall, before convicting any 
person, take into consideration the circumstances leading to the commi ssion of the offence, the act 
committed, the state or mind of the person charged of the offence at the time of the commission of the act 
and al l other rele vant factors.  
4. Abetment of sati.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
if any person commits sati, whoever abets the commission of such sati, either directly or indirectly, shall 
be punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liab le to fine.  
(2) If any person attempts to commit sati, whoever abets such attempt, either directly or indirectly, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, any of the following acts or the like shall also be 
deemed to be an abetment, namely: — 
(a) any inducement to a widow or woman to get her burnt or buried alive along with the body of 
her deceased husband or with any other rela tive or with any article, object or thing associated with the 
husband or such relative, irrespective of whether she is in a fit state of mind or is labouring under a 
state of intoxication or stupefaction or other cause impeding the exercise of her free wil l; 
(b) making a widow or woman believe that the commission of sati would result in some spiritual 
benefit to her or her  deceased husband or relative o r the general well being of the family;  
(c)  encouraging a widow or woman to remain fixed in her resolve t o commit sati and thus 
instigating her to commit sati; 
(d) participating in any procession in connection with the commission of sati or aiding the widow 
or woman in her decision to commit sati by taking her along with body of her deceased husband or 
relation  to the cremation or burial ground;  
(e) being present at the place where sati is committed as an active participant to such commission 
or to any ceremony  connected with it;  
(f) preventing or obstructing the widow or woman from saving herself from b eing burnt or buried 
alive;  
(g) obstructing, or interfering with, the police in the discharge of its duties of taking any steps to 
prevent the commission of sati. 
5. Punishment for glorification of sati.—Whoever does any act for the glorification of sati shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to 
seven years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty 
thousand rupees.  
PART  III 
POWERSOF  COLLECTOROR  DISTRICT  MAGISTRATETO PREVENT OFFENCES RELATING TO SATI  
6. Power to prohibit certain acts .—(1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate is of the 
opinion that sati or any abetmen t thereof is being,  or is about to be committed, he may, by order, prohibit 
the doing of any act towards the commission of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the 
order.   4 
 (2)The Collector or the District Magistrate may also, by order, prohibit the glorificat ion in any 
manner of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the order.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall, if such 
contravention is not punishable under any other provision of this Act, be pu nishable with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years and with fine which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty thousand rupees.  
7. Power to remove certain templ es or other structures .—(1) The State Government may, if it is 
satisfied that in any temple or other structure which has been in existence for not less than twenty years, 
any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony is carried on with a view to perpetuate the 
honour of, o r to preserve the memory of, any person in respect of whom sati has been committed, by 
order, direct the removal of such temple or other structure.  
(2) The Collector or the District Magistrate may, if he is satisfied that in any temple or other structure, 
other than that referred to in sub -section ( 1), any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony is 
carried on with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to  preserve the memory of , any person is respect of 
whom sati has been committed, by order, dir ect the removal of such temple or other structure.  
(3) Where any order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) is not complied with, the State 
Government or the Collector or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the temple or other 
structure to be removed through a police officer not below the rank of a Sub -Inspector at the cost of the 
defaulter.  
8.  Power to seize certain properties .—(1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate has reason 
to believe that any funds or property have been collected or acquired for the purpose of glorification of 
the commission of any sati or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicio n of the 
commission of any offence under this Act, he may seize such funds or property.  
(2) Every Collector or District Magistrate acting under sub -section ( 1) shall report the seizure to the 
Special Court, if any, constituted to try any offence in relatio n to which such funds or property were 
collected or acquired and shall await the orders of such Special Court as to the disposal of the same.  
PART  IV 
SPECIAL  COURTS  
9. Trial of offences under this Act .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code, all 
offences under this Act shall be triable only by a Special Court constituted under this section.  
(2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette , constitute one or more Special 
Courts for the tri al of offences under this Act and every Special Court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect 
of the whole or such part of the State as may be specified in the notification.  
(3) A Special Court shall be presided over by a Judge to be appointed by the State Government with 
the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special Court unless he is, 
immediately before such appointment, a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge in  any State.  
10. Special Public Prosecutors .—(1) For every Special Court, the State Government shall appoint a 
person to be a Special Public Prosecutor.  
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section only if  
he had been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years or has held any post for a period of 
not less than seven years under the State requiring special knowledge of law.  
(3) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this se ction shall be deemed to be a 
Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code and the provisions of the 
Code shall have effect accordingly.   5 
 11. Procedure and powers of Special Courts .—(1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any 
offence, without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint of facts which 
constitute such offence, or upon a police report of such facts.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, for the purp ose of th e trial of any 
offence, have all the  powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of 
Session, so far as may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for trial before a Court 
of Session.  
12. Power  of Special Court with respect to other offences .—(1) When trying any offence under 
this Act, a Special Court may also try any other offence with which the accused may, under the Code, be 
charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with such othe r offence.  
(2) If, in the course of any trial of any offence under this Act it is found that the accused person has 
committed any other offence under this Act or under any other law, a Special Court may convict such 
person also of such other offence and pa ss any sentence authorised by this Act or such other law for the 
punishment thereof.  
(3) In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as possible and, in 
particular, where the examination of witnesses has begun, the same shall be continued from day to day 
until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, and if any Special Court finds the adjournment 
of the same beyond the following date to be necessary, it shall record its reasons for doing so.  
13. Forfeiture of funds o r property .—Where a person has been convicted of an offence under this 
Act, the Special Court trying such offence may, if it is considered necessary so to do, declare that any 
funds or property seized under section 8 shall stand forfeited to the State.  
14. Appeal .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal shall lie as a matter of 
right from any judgment, sentence or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the 
High Court both on facts and on law.  
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expi ry of the said period of thirty  days 
if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of 
thirty days.  
PART  V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Protection of action taken under this Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the State Government or any officer or authority of the State Government for anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules or orders made under this 
Act. 
16. Burden of proof .—Where any person is prosecuted of an of fence under section 4, the burden of 
proving that he had not committed the offence under the said section shall be on him.  
17. Obligation of certain persons to report about the commission of offence under  this Act .—(1) 
All officers of Government are hereby  required and empowered to assist the police in the execution of the 
provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder . 
(2) All village officers and such other officers as may be specified by the Collector or the District 
Magistrate in relation to any area and the inhabitants of such area shall, if they have reason to believe or 
have the knowledge that sati is about to be, or  has been, committed in the area shall forthwith report such 
fact to the nearest police station.  
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may e xtend to two years and shall also be liable to 
fine.  6 
 18. Person convicted of an offence under section 4 to be disqualified from inheriting certain 
properties .—A person convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 in relation to the 
commission of sati shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person in respect of whom 
such sati has been committed or the property of any other person which he would have been entitled to 
inherit on the de ath of the person in respect of whom such sati has been committed.  
19.[Amendment of Act 43 of 1951 ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001 ( 30 of 2001 ) s.2 
and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
20. Act to have over riding effect .—The provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith con tained in any enactment other than 
this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act . 
21. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica tion or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
22. Repeal of existing laws .—(1) All laws in force in any State immediately before the 
commencement of this Act in that State which provide for the pr evention or the glorification of sati shall, 
on such commencement, stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under any law repealed under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act, and, in particular, any case taken cognizance of by a Special Court under the provisions of any law 
so repealed and pending before it immediately before the commencement of this Act in that State shall 
continue to be d ealt with by that Special Court after such commencement as if such Special Court had 
been constituted under section 9 of this Act.  
 
  
1
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in  sub-section ( 1),—
(i) in clause ( aa), for the word “means”,  the word “includes” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( c), after sub-clause ( v), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(va) he has suffered a loss in pursuance of an unfair contract entered
into by him;”;Short title andcom-mencement.
68 of 1986. Amendment
of section 2.Bill No.  127  of   2011
5
10AS INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA2
(iii) in clause ( f), for the word “means”, the word “includes” shall be substituted;
(iv) for clause ( g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(g) “deficiency” include—
(i) any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality,
nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained byor under any law for the time being in force or has been undertaken to beperformed by a person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relationto any service;
(ii) any act of omission or commission which causes any damage to
the consumer on account of negligence or consciously withholding ofrelevant information to the consumer;';
(v) after clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ga) “political party” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause
(f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Representation of the People Act,
1951;’;
(vi) after clause ( h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ha) “electronic form” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause
(r) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;’;
(vii)  in clause ( r), after sub-clause ( 6), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(7) after selling such goods or rendering of such services, fails to issue
bill or cash memo or receipt for the goods sold or service rendered;
(8) after selling such goods or rendering of such services, refuses to take
back or withdraw the goods or withdraw or discontinue the service and refusesto refund the consideration thereof, if paid, within a period of thirty days afterthe receipt of goods or availing of services it is so requested by the consumer;
(9) discloses to any other person any personal information given in
confidence by the consumer:
Provided that disclosure of personal information given with express or
implied consent of the consumer or under provisions of any law in force or inpublic interest shall not be constructed as a deficiency of service':
(viii) after clause ( r), the following  clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(s) “unfair contract” means a contract which contains any one or more of
the following clauses:—
(i) requires excessive security deposits to be given by a party to
the contract for the performance of contractual obligations; or
(ii) impose any penalty on a party to the contract for the breach
thereof which is wholly disproportionate to the loss ocurred due to suchbreach to the other party to the contract; or
(iii) refuses to accept early repayment of debts on payment of
applicable penalty;
(iv) entitles a party to the contract to terminate without reasonable
cause the contract unilaterally.’.43 of 1951.
21 of 2000.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
403
3. In section 9 of the principal Act, in clause ( a), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that in a district where no District Forum has been established
or if established, there exists at any time vacancy in the office of the President or amember, in such case, the State Government may, by notification, direct that—
(a) a District Forum, as specified in the notification, shall exercise the
jurisdiction in respect of such District Forum as may be specified in thenotification; or
(b) the President or a member of a District Forum, as the case may be, shall
exercise the power or discharge the functions of the President or the member, asthe case may be, of any other District Forum as may be specified in thenotification .”.
4. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( b),—
(I)  in the opening portion, for the words “two other members”, the words
"not less than two and not more than such number of members, as may beprescribed, and at least"  shall be substituted;
(II) in sub-clause ( iii), after the words “public affairs”, the words
"consumer affairs" shall be inserted;
(III) after sub-clause ( iii), the following proviso and Explanation  shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members shall be
from amongst persons having a judicial background.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, the expression
“persons having judicial background” shall mean persons who haveserved as a presiding officer for at least one year in a judicial court:’;
(IV) in the proviso,—
(A) in the opening portion, for the words “Provided that a person
shall be disqualified for appointment”, the words “Provided further thata person shall be disqualified for appointment or for continuation assuch” shall be substituted;
(B) after clause ( e), the following clause shall be inserted
namely:—
“(ee) is or continues to be, after appointment, a member or
office bearer of any political party; or”;
(ii) after sub-section ( 1A), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(1B) The State Governments may, if it is of the opinion that any person
recommended by the Selection Committee under sub-section ( 1A) has not
been found fit for such appointment, it may, within a period of two months fromsuch recommendation and for reasons to be recorded in writing, refer thematter to the Selection Committee for fresh recommendation.”;
(iii) in sub-section ( 2),—
(a) after the first proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the
District Forum shall also be eligible for re-appointment in the  manner
provided in sub-section ( 1A):Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
454
Provided also that the Selection Committee shall take into
consideration the observations or performance appraisal report, if any,made by the President of the State Commission in respect of the Presidentor member of the District Forum being considered for re-appointmentas such:”;
(b)  in the second proviso, for the words “provided further”, the words
“Provided also” shall be substituted;
(iv) after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“(4) The President or member of the District Forum, on ceasing to hold
office as such, shall not appear, act or plead  before any District Forum in thatState in which he had been as the President or member, as the case may be, ofthe District Forum.”.
5.After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“10A. ( 1) The State Government shall determine the nature and categories of
the officers and other employees required to assist the District Forum in the dischargeof its functions and provide the District Forum with such officers and other employeesas it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the District Forum shall discharge
their functions under the general superintendence of the President.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the officers and other employees of the District Forum shall be such asmay be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that officers and other employees employed on or before the
commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2011, in a District
Forum, shall continue to be employed as such unless the nature and categoriesthereof has been determined by the State Government.”.
6. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) (a) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the District Forum may be
exercised by benches thereof.
(b) A Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members as
the President may deem fit:
     Provided that the single member bench shall exercise jurisdiction, power
and authority in relation to such matters as may be prescribed by the StateGovernment in consultation with the State Commission and it shall not, in any case,
dispose of any case fixed for final hearing.”.
7.After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“11A. The District Forum shall ordinarily function in the district headquarters
and perform its functions at such other place, as the State Government may, in consultationwith the State Commission, notify in the Official Gazette from time to time.”.
8.In section 12 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), in the opening portion, after the words “agreed to be
provided”, the words “or in respect of any restrictive trade practice or unfair trade
practice adopted”  shall be inserted;Insertion ofnew section10A.
Amendment
of section 11.
Insertion of
new section11A.
Circuit
benches.Staff of
DistrictForum.
Amendment
of section 12.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
455
(b) in sub-section ( 2), after the words “in such manner”, the words and brackets
“(including electronic form)” shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-section ( 3),—
(i) in the second proviso, for the words “twenty-one days”, the words
“twenty-eight days” shall be substituted;
(ii) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided also that if the District Forum does not decide the issue
of admissibility of the complaint within the period specified in the secondproviso, it shall be deemed to have been admitted except in the casewhere the complainant has failed to appear before the District Forum onthe day of hearing without any reasonable ground.”.
9.In section 14 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) in the opening portion, after the words “about the services”, the words
“or restrictive trade practices or unfair trade practices” shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause ( c), after the word “by the complainant”, the words “along
with reasonable  rate of interest on such price or charges as may be decided bythe District Forum” shall be inserted;
(iii) in clauses ( g), (h) and ( ha), after the word “hazardous”, the words “or
unsafe” shall respectively be inserted;
(iv)  in clause ( hb), in the first proviso, for the words “five per cent.”, the
words “twenty-five per cent.” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2A), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided further that the other member shall give his opinion on such
point or points referred to him within a period of three months from the date ofsuch reference.”.
10.In section 15 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, the words “or twenty-
five thousand rupees, whichever is less” shall be omitted.
11.In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( b)—
(a) in the opening portion, for the words “and one of whom” the words
“at least one of whom” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-clause ( i), for the words “thirty-five years”, the words “forty-
five years” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-clause ( iii) ,—
(A) for the words “ten years”, the words “twenty years” shall be
substituted;
(B) after the words “public  affairs”, the words “consumer  affairs”
shall be inserted;
(C) in the first proviso, in the 
Explanation , for the words “ten
years”, the words “twenty years” shall be substituted;
(D) in the second proviso,—
(I) after the word “appointment”, the words “or for
continuation as  such” shall be inserted;Amendmentof section 14.
Amendment
of section 15.
Amendment
of section 16.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
456
(II) after clause ( e), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ee) is or continues to be, after appointment, a member
or office bearer of any political party; or”;
(ii) in sub-section ( 1A), for the words, brackets and figure “under sub-section
(1)”, the words, brackets, letter, and figure “under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1)” shall
be substituted;
(iii) after sub-section ( 1A), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1AA) The State Governments may, if it is of the opinion that any person
recommended by the Selection Committee under sub-section ( 1A) has not been
found fit for such appointment, it may, within a period of two months from suchrecommendation and for reasons to be recorded in writing, refer the matter tothe Selection Committee for fresh recommendations.”;
(iv) in sub-section ( 1B), in clause ( iii), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided that the President or the members, as the case may be, shall
give his or their opinion on the point or points referred to him or them within aperiod of three months from the date of such reference.”.
(v) in sub-section ( 3), after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that the Selection Committee shall take into consideration
the observations or performance appraisal report, if any, made by the Presidentof the National Commission in respect of the member of the State Commissionbeing considered for re-appointment:”;
(vi) after sub-section ( 4), the following sub-section shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“(5) The President or member of the State Commission, on ceasing to
hold office as such, shall not appear, act or plead before the State Commissionor any District Forum in that State in which he had been as the President ormember, as the case may be, of the State Commission.”.
12.After section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“16A. ( 1) The State Government shall determine the nature and categories of
the officers and other employees required to assist the State Commission in thedischarge of its functions and provide the Commission with such officers and otheremployees as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the State Commission shall discharge
their functions under the general superintendence of the President.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the officers and other employees of the State Commission shall be suchas may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that the officers and other employees employed on or before the
commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2011, in a StateCommission, shall continue to be employed as such unless the nature and categoriesthereof has been determined by the State Government.”.
13. In section 19 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, the words “or rupees
thirty-five thousand, whichever is less” shall be omitted.Insertion ofnew section16A.
Staff of State
Commission.
Amendment
of section 19.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
457
14. After section 19A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“19B. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 18, the State
Commission shall have the power to review any order made by it, when there is anerror apparent on the face of record.”.
15. In section 20 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( b)—
(a) in the opening portion, for the words “and one of whom” the words
“at least one of whom” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-clause ( i), for the words “thirty-five years”, the words “fifty-
five years” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-clause ( iii) ,—
(A) for the words “ten years”, the words “thirty years” shall be
substituted;
(B) after the words “public affairs”, the words “,consumer affairs”
shall be inserted;
(C) for the Explanation, the following Explanation  shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘Explanation .— For the purposes of this clause, the expression
“persons having judicial background” shall mean persons who are orhave been a Judge of a High Court or Supreme Court:’;
(D) in the second proviso,—
(I) after the word “appointment”, the words “or for
continuation as such” shall be inserted;
(II) after clause ( e), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ee) is or continues to be, after appointment, a member
or office bearer of any political party; or”;
(E) in the third proviso, after clause ( a), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) the President of the National Commission - Member;”;
(ii) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that the Central Government may, if it is of the opinion
that any person recommended by the Selection Committee under this sectionhas not been found fit for such appointment, it may, within a period of twomonths from such recommendation and for reasons to be recorded in writing,refer the matter to the Selection Committee for fresh recommendations.”;
(iii) in sub-section (1 A), in clause ( iii), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided that the President or the members, as the case may be, shall
give his or their opinion on the point or points referred to him or them within aperiod of three months from the date of such reference.”.
(iv) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The conditions of service of the members of the National Commission
shall be the same as are applicable to a Judge of a High Court:
Provided that the salary or honorarium  and other allowances payable to
the Members of the  National Commission shall be such as may be prescribedby the Central Government’’;Insertion ofnew section19B.
Power of
Commissionto revieworder.
Amendment
of section 20.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
458
(v) after sub-section ( 4), the following  sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) A member of the National Commission, on ceasing to hold office as
such, shall not appear, act or plead before the National Commission or any StateCommission or District Forum.”.
16. After section 22D of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“22E. Where the National Commission or the State Commission, as the case
may be, on application by a complainant or otherwise, is of the opinion that it involvesthe larger interest of consumers, it may direct any individual or organisation or expertto assist the National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be.”.
17.In section 23 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, the words “or rupees
fifty thousand, whichever is less” shall be omitted.
18.For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“25. ( 1) Every order made by the District Forum, the State Commission or the
National Commission shall be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decreemade by a court in a suit pending therein, and it shall be lawful for the District Forum,the State Commission or the National Commission to send, in case of its inability toexecute such order, to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the
company is situated; or
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, place where the
person concerned voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally worksfor gain, is situated.
(2) Where any order made by the District Forum, State Commission or the
National Commission, as the case may be, is not complied with, such person notcomplying with the order shall be required to pay not less than five hundred rupees orone-half per cent. of the value of the amount awarded, whichever is higher, for eachday of delay of such non-compliance of the order till it is paid, in addition to thepayment of the awarded amount.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2),
where any order made under this Act is not complied with, the District Forum or theState Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, may order theproperty of the person, not complying with such order to be attached.
(4) No attachment made under sub-section ( 3) shall remain in force for more
than three months at the end of which, if the non-compliance continues, the propertyattached may be sold and out of the proceeds thereof, the District Forum or the StateCommission or the National Commission may award such damages, as it thinks fit, tothe complainant and shall pay the balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.
(5) Where any amount is due from any person under any order made by a
District Forum, State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, theperson entitled to the amount may make an application to the District Forum, the StateCommission or the National Commission, as the case may be, and such District Forumor the State Commission or the National Commission may issue a certificate for thesaid amount to the Collector of the district (by whatever name called) and the Collectorshall proceed to recover the amount in the same manner as arrears of land revenue.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this section, it shall be the
duty of the party against whom the order is passed by the District Forum or the StateCommission or the National Commission, as the case may be, to report back to theDistrict Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case maybe, about the status of implementation of the order and the proceedings would beInsertion of newsection 22E.
Power of
Commissionto seekassistance.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 25.
Enforcement
of orders ofDistrictForum, StateCommissionor NationalCommission.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
509
deemed to be continuing till the implementation of the order and it shall be the
responsibility of the District Forum or the State Commission or the NationalCommission, as the case may be, to monitor the same till its implementation and totake appropriate penal action wherever necessary.”.
19.In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), the words “on such
conferment of powers” and the words “on whom the powers are so conferred” shall beomitted.
20.After section 28A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“28B. ( 1) The Central Government may, by a general or special order, call upon
the National Commission to furnish, periodically or as and when required anyinformation concerning the pendency of cases in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) The State Government may, by a general or special order, call upon the State
Commission or any District Forum to furnish, periodically or as and when requiredany information concerning the pendency of cases in such form as may be prescribedby the State Government.
28C. ( 1) Every District Forum shall furnish to the State Commission at such time
and in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations the returns andstatements and particulars in regard to pendency of cases before the District Forum.
(2) Every State Commission shall furnish to the National Commission and the
State Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be specified byregulations the returns and statements and such particulars in regard to pendency ofcases before the State Commission or the District Forum.
(3) The National Commission shall furnish to the Central Government at such
time and in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations the returns andstatements and particulars in regard to pendency of cases before the NationalCommission, State Commission and the District Forum.
(4) The District Forum, the State Commission and the National Commission
shall publish all data relating to pendency of cases (including the details of filing of acase or application and disposal thereof, daily cause list and orders passed on suchdate and other related information) on their respective website.
21. In section 30 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words and figures “and section 23”, the words,
figures, brackets and letter “section 23 and sub-section ( 1) of section 28B” shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) after the word and figures “section 10”, the words, brackets, figures
and letter “sub-section ( 3) of section 10A” shall be inserted;
(ii) for the words, brackets, letter and figures “and clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2) of section 16 of this Act”, the words, brackets,
letters and figures “clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2) of section
16, sub-section ( 3) of section 16A and sub-section ( 2) of section 28B of this Act
or any other matter which is to be, or may be, required to be prescribed” shall besubstituted.Amendmentof section 27.
Insertion of
new sections28B and 28C.
Power to call
forinformation.
Returns and
reports.
Amendment
of section 30.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (the said Act) was enacted by Parliament to provide
for better protection of the interests of consumers and for that purpose to make provision forestablishment of consumer councils and other authorities for the settlement of consumerdisputes, and for matter connected therewith. The aforesaid Act has been amended in theyears 1991, 1993 and 2002 to make the provisions of the Act more effective.
2. Although, the working of the consumer dispute redressal agencies has served the
purpose under the said Act to a considerable extent, the disposal of cases has not been asquick due to the various constraints. Several shortcomings have been noticed whileimplementing various provisions of the Act. With a view to widening and amplifying thescope of some of the provisions of the said Act, to facilitate faster disposal of cases and torationalize the qualifications and procedure of selection of the Presidents and Members ofthe National Commission, State Commission and District Forum, it has been felt necessary toamend the said Act. The Consumer Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2011, inter alia, makes the
following provisions, namely:—
(a) define the expression ‘unfair contract’ and include the same within the scope
of the Act;
(b) confer power upon the State Government to direct, by notification,—
(i) that a District Forum shall exercise the jurisdiction of any other District
where no District Forum has been constituted; or
(ii) that the President or a member of a District Forum shall discharge the
functions of President or members of any other District Forum in which thereexist a vacancy of President or members, as the case may be;
(c) confer power upon the State Government to refer back the recommendation
of the Selection Committee to it for making fresh recommendation, within a period oftwo months from such recommendation and for reasons to be recorded in writing, incase the State Government is of the opinion that any person recommended by theSelection Committee for appointment as President or member of a District Forum or amember of the State Commission, as the case may be, has not been found fit forappointment as such;
(d) make a provision that the Selection Committee shall take into consideration
the observations or performance appraisal report, if any, made by the President of theState Commission or the President of the National Commission, as the case may be, inrespect of any member of the District Forum or the State Commission, as the case maybe, being considered for reappointment as such;
(e) make a provision to the effect that the President or member of the District
Forum, on ceasing to hold office as such, shall not appear, act or plead before anyDistrict Forum in that State in which he had been working as the President or member,as the case may be, of the District Forum;
(f) make a provision to provide that the District Forum shall ordinarily function in
the district headquarters and perform its functions at such other place, as the SateGovernment may, in consultation with the State Commission, notify in the OfficialGazette from time to time;
(g) make a provision for making of a complaint by electronic form also to the
District Forum;
1011
(h) make a provision for admissibility of the complaint to be decided twenty-
eight days instead of twenty-one days from the date on which the complaint wasreceived and in case the District Forum does not decide the issue of admissibility ofthe complaint within the said period it shall be deemed to have been admitted except inthe case where the complainant has failed to appear before the District Forum on theday of hearing without any reasonsable ground;
(i) confer power upon the District Forum to issue an order to the opposite party
to pay reasonable rate of interest on such price or charges as may be decided by theDistrict Forum in case the price of the goods or charges paid by the complainant havebeen ordered to be returned to the complainant;
(j) make provision for additional disqualification of a member of the District
Forum or the State  Commission or the National Commission if he is or continues to be,after appointment, a member or office bearer of any political party;
(k)  make provision for increase of the minimum age for appointment as member
in case of the State Commission from thirty-five years to forty-five years and in thecase of the National  Commission from thirty-five years to fifty-five years;
(l) make provision for increase of the period of experience for appointment as
member in case of the State Commission from ten years to twenty years and in case ofthe National Commission from ten years to thirty years;
(m) make provision for substitution of the explanation relating to definition of
the expression “person having judicial background” in case of the National Commis-sion, as  to include therein the persons who are or have been a Judge of a High Courtor the Supreme Court;
(n) make provision that the President or member of the District Forum, the State
Commission and the National  Commission, on ceasing to hold office as such, shall notappear, act or plead before the District Forum or the State Commission or the NationalCommission, as the case may be;
(o) make provision that the conditions of service of the members of the National
Commission shall be the same as are applicable to a Judge of a High Court;
(p) confer power upon the National Commission or the State Commission, as the
case may be, to direct any individual or organisation or expert to assist the NationalCommission or the State Commission, as the case may be, on application by a com-plainant or otherwise, if  the National Commission or the State Commission is of theopinion that it involves the larger interest of consumers;
(q) make a provision that an order of the District Forum, the State Commission or
the National Commission may be enforced by it as if it were a decree of a  civil court orit may send, in case of its inability to execute such order to the court having jurisdic-tion;
(r) make a provision for payment, by every person not complying with  the order
of the District Forum, State Commission or the National Commission, as the case maybe, of an amount of not less than five hundred rupees or one-half per cent of the valueof the amount awarded, whichever is higher, for each day of delay of such non-compliance of the order, till it is paid, in addition to the payment of the awardedamount;
(s) confer power upon the Central Government to call upon the National
Commission to furnish, periodically or as and when required any information concerningthe pendency of cases in the prescribed form; and confer power upon the StateGovernment to call upon the State Commission or any District Forum to furnish,periodically or as and when required any information concerning the pendency ofcases in the prescribed form;12
(t) make provisions for furnishing of returns and statement and particulars in
regard to pendency of cases, by—
(i) the District  Forum to the State Commission,(ii) the State Commission to the National Commission and the State
Government,
(iii) the National Commission to Central Government.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; K. V. THOMAS.
The 2nd November , 2011.FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 10 of the Act to enable the State Government
to appoint in the District Forum such number of members  as may be prescribed in place oftwo members.
2. Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 10A to enable the State Government
to determine the nature and categories of officers and other employees required to assist theDistrict Forum in the discharge of its functions and provide  the District Forum with suchofficers and other employees as it may think fit. The salaries and allowances payable to, andthe other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other employees of the Districtforum shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
3. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section ( 3) in section 11  so as to enable
the President of the District Forum to constitute benches with one or more members.
4. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 11A to enable the State Government
to notify in consultation with the State Commission, the other place of sitting of the DistrictForum to perform its functions.
5. Clause 12 seeks to insert a new section 16A to enable the State Government to
determine the nature and categories of the officers and other employees required to assistthe State Commission in the discharge of its functions and provide the Commission withsuch officers and other employees as it may think fit. The salaries and allowances payable toand the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other employees of theState Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
6. It is not possible to indicate the exact expenditure involved in appointment of
additional members and officers and employees of the District Forum and the State Commissionas this would depend upon the actual number of such members or officers and otheremployees appointed. However, the expenditure on this account would be incurred by theState Governments.
13MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 10 of the Act which empowers the State
Government to prescribe the number of members of District Forum for appointment.
2. Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 10A which empowers the State
Government to prescribe the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms andconditions of service of, the officers and other employees of the District Forum.
3. Clause 12  of the Bill seeks to insert new section 16A which empowers the State
Government to prescribe the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms andconditions of service of, the officers and other employees of the State Commission.
4. Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 28B and 28C. Sub-section ( 1) of
section 28B provides to prescribe the form in which any information concerning the pen-dency of cases shall be furnished by the National Commission  to the Central Government.Sub-section ( 2)  of said section provides to prescribe the form in which any information
concerning the pendency of cases shall be furnished by the State Commission to the StateGovernment. Sub-section ( 1) of section 28C empowers the National Commission to specify
by regulations the time, and the form and manner in which returns and statements and suchparticulars in regard to pendency of cases before the District Forum shall be furnished by theDistrict Forum to the State Commission and, by the State Commission to the National  Com-mission.
5. The rules made by the Central Government and the regulations made by the National
Commission shall be laid, as soon as they are made, before both the Houses of Parliamentunder sub-section ( 1)  of section 31 and  the rules  made by the State Government shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature under sub-section ( 2) of
that section. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matter ofprocedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Billitself. The delegation of legislative powers, therefore, is of normal character.
14ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE CONSUMER  PROTECTION  ACT, 1986
(68 OF 1986)
* * * * *
2.  (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(aa) “branch office” means—
* * * * *
(f) “defect” means any fault, imperfection or shortcoming in the quality, quantity,
potency, purity or standard which is required to be maintained by or under any law forthe time being in force or under any contract, express or implied, or as is claimed by thetrader in any manner whatsoever in relation to any goods;
(g) “deficiency” means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in
the quality, nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by orunder any law for the time being in force or has been undertaken to be performed by a
person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service;
* * * * *
(r) “unfair trade practice’’ means a trade practice which, for the purpose of
promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any service,
adopts any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice including any of the following
practices, namely:—
(1)* * * * *
CHAPTER III
C
ONSUMER  DISPUTES  REDRESSAL  AGENCIES
9. There shall be established for the purposes of this Act, the following agencies,
namely:—
(a) a Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum to be known as the “District Forum”
established by the State Government in each district of the State by notification:
Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one
District Forum in a district;
* * * * *
10. (1) Each District Forum shall consist of,—
* * * * *
(b) two other members, one of whom shall be a women, who shall have the
following qualifications, namely:—
* * * * *
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and  have adequate
knowledge and experience of at least ten years, in dealing with problems relatingto economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs or
administration:
Provided that a persons shall be disqualified for appointment as a member,
if he—
* * * * *Definitions.
Establishment
of ConsumerDisputesRedressalAgencies.
Composition
of  the DistrictForum.
1516
(2) Every member of the  District Forum shall hold office for a term of five years or up
to the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier:
* * * * *
Provided further that a member may resign his office in writing under his hand addressed
to the State Government and on such resignation being accepted, his office shall becomevacant and may be filled by appointment of a person possessing any of the qualifications
mentioned in sub-section (1) in relation to the category of the member who is required to be
appointed under the provisions of sub-section (1A) in place of the person who has resigned:
* * * * *
12. (1) A Complaint in relation to any goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
delivered or any  service provided or agreed to be provided may be filed with a District Forum
by—
* * * * *
(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied with such amount
of fee and payable in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) On receipt of a complaint made under sub-section (1), the District Forum may, by
order, allow the complaint to the proceeded with or rejected:
* * * * *
Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided
within twenty-one days from the date on which the complaint was received.
* * * * *
14. (1) If, after the proceeding conducted under section 13, the District Forum is
satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any other defects specified in the
complaint or that any or the allegations contained in the complaint about the services areproved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him to do one or more of the
following things, namely:—
* * * * *
(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may be, the charges paid
by the complainant;
* * * * *
(g) not to offer the hazardous goods for sale;
(h) to withdraw the hazardous goods from being offered for sale;
(ha) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from offering services
which are hazardous in nature;
(hb) to pay such sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss
or injury has been suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiableconveniently:
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be less than five
per cent. of the value of such defective goods sold or services provided, as the casemay be, to such consumers:
* * * * *
(2A) Every order made by the District Forum under sub-section ( 1) shall be signed by
its President and the member or members who conducted the proceeding:
Provided that where the proceeding is conducted by the President and one member
and they differ on any point or points, they shall state the point or points on which theyManner inwhichcomplaintshall be made.
Finding of the
DistrictForum.17
differ and refer the same to the other member for hearing on such point or points and the
opinion of the majority shall be the order of the District Forum.
* * * * *
15. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the District Forum may prefer an appeal
against such order to the State Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of theorder, in such form and manner as may be prescribed:
* * * * *
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the District Forum, shall be entertained by the State Commission unlessthe appellant has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of  that amount ortwenty-five thousand rupees, whichever is less.
16. (1) Each State Commission  shall consist  of—
* * * * *
(b) Not less than two, and not more than such number of members, as may be
prescribed, and one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the following
qualifications, namely:—
(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age;
* * * * *
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems relatingto economics,  law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs oradministration:
Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members shall  be from
amongst  the persons having a judicial background.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expression "persons having a
judicial background" shall mean persons having knowledge and experience for at least a
period of ten years as a presiding officer at the district level court or any tribunal at equivalent
level:
Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member,
if he—
* * * * *
(1A) Every appointment under sub-section (1) shall be made by the State Government
on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the following members,namely:—
* * * * *(1B)* * * * *
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if themembers are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ,and make a reference to the President who shall either hear the point or points himself
or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more or the other
members and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of themajority of the members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
* * * * *
(3)  Every member of the State Commission shall hold office for a term of five years or
up to the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier:Appeal.
Composition
of the StateCommission.
* * * * *18
Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the State Commission shall
also be eligible for re-appointment in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of
this section:
* * * * *
19. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State Commission in exercise of its
powers conferred by sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of section 17 may prefer an appeal against
such order to the National Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of the
order in such form and manner as may be prescribed:
* * * * *
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the State Commission, shall be entertained by the National Commission
unless the appellant has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of the amount or
rupees thirty-five thousand, whichever is less:
* * * * *
20. (1) The National Commission shall consist of—
* * * * *
(b) not less than four, and not more than such number of members, as may be
prescribed, and one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the following
qualifications, namely:—
(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age;
* * * * *
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing and have adequate
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems relating
to economics, law, commerce, accountancy industry, public affairs or
administration:
* * * * *
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expression “persons having judicial
background” shall mean persons having knowledge and experience for at least a period of
ten years as a presiding officer at the district level court or any tribunal at equivalent level:
Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment, if he—
* * * * *
Provided also that every appointment under this clause shall be made by the
Central Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting ofthe following, namely:—
(a) a person who is a Judge of the Supreme Court, to be nominated by the Chief
Justice of India —Chairman;
* * * * *
(1A)(i)* * * * *
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a  majority,  but if the members areequally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a referenceto the President who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearingon such point or points by one or more or the other members and such point or points shallbe decided according to the opinion of the majority of the members who have heard the case,including those who first heard it.
(2) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to and the other terms and
conditions of service of the members of the National Commission shall be such as may beprescribed by the Central Government.
* * * * *Appeals.
Composition
of theNationalCommission.19
23. Any person, aggreived by an order made by the National Commission in exercise of
its power conferred by sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of section 21, may prefer an appeal against
such order to the Supreme Court within a period of thirty days from the date of the order:
* * * * *
Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme Courtunless that person has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that amount orrupees fifty thousand, whichever is less.
* * * * *
25. (1) Where an interim order made under this Act is not complied with, the District
Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, may orderthe property of the person, not complying with such order to be attached.
(2) No attachment made under sub-section ( 1) shall remain in force for more than three
months at the end of which, if the non-compliance continues, the property attached may besold and out of the proceeds thereof, the District Forum or the State Commission or theNational Commission may award such damages as it thinks fit to the complainant and shallpay the balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.
(3)  Where any amount is due from any person under an order made by a District
Forum, State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, the personentitled to the amount may make an application to the District Forum, the State Commissionor the National Commission, as the case may be, and such District  Forum or the StateCommission or the National Commission may issue a certificate for the said amount to theCollector of the district (by whatever name called) and the Collector shall proceed to recoverthe amount in the same manner as arrears of land revenue.
* * * * *
27.(1)* * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shallhave the power of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the trial of offences under thisAct, and on such conferment of powers, the District Forum or the State Commission or theNational Commission, as the case may be, on whom the powers are so conferred, shall bedeemed to be a Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the purpose of the Code of CriminalProcedure, 1973.
* * * * *
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions contained in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2, clause ( b) of sub-section
(2) of section 4, sub-section (2) of section 5, sub-section ( 2) of section 12, clause ( vi) of
sub-section ( 4) of section 13, clause ( hb) of sub-section ( 1) of section 14, section 19, clause
(b) of sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2) of section 20, section 22 and section 23 of this Act.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions
contained in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) and sub-section ( 4) of section 7, clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 2) and sub-section ( 4) of section 8A, clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) and sub-
section ( 3) of section 10, clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 13, clause ( hb) of sub-
section (
1) and sub-section ( 3) of section 14, section 15 and clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) and
sub-section  ( 2) of section 16 of this Act.
* * * * *Appeal.
Enforcement
of orders of theDistrict Forum,the StateCommission orthe NationalCommission.
2 of 1974.Penalties.
Power to
make rules.LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
————
(Shri K.V. Thomas, Minister for Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution )
GMGIPMRND—3094LS(S3)—09-12-2011.
1 
 THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908  
______  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1.  Short title, commencement and extent.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Subordination of Courts.  
4. Savings.  
5. Application of the Code to Revenue Courts.  
6. Pecuniary juris diction.   
7. Provincial Small Cause Courts.  
8. Presidency Small Cause Courts.  
PART I  
SUITS IN GENERAL  
JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS AND Res judicata  
9. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred.  
10. Stay of suit.  
11. Res judicata.  
12. Bar to further suit.  
13. When foreign judgment not conclusive.  
14. Presumption as to foreign judgments.  
PLACE OF SUING  
15. Court in which suits to be instituted.  
16. Suits to be instituted where subject -matter situate.  
17. Suits for immovable property situate within jurisdictio n of different Courts.  
18. Place of Institution of suit where local limits of jurisdiction of Courts ar e uncertain.  
19. Suits for compensation for wrongs to person or movables.  
20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause of action ari ses. 
21. Objections to jurisdiction.  
21A. Bar on suit to set aside decree on objection as to place of suing.  
22. Power to transfer suits which may be instituted in more than one Court.  
23. To what Court application lies.  
24. General power of transfer and w ithdrawal.  
25. Power of Supreme Court to transfer suits, etc.  
INSTITUTION OF SUITS  
26.  Institution of suits.  2 
 SUMMONS AND DISCOVERY  
SECTIONS  
27. Summons to defendants.  
28. Service of summons where defendant resides in another State.  
29. Service of foreign  summonses.  
30. Power to order discovery and the like.  
31. Summons to witness.  
32. Penalty for default.  
JUDGMENT AND DECREE  
33. Judgment and decree.  
INTEREST  
34. Interest.  
COSTS  
35. Costs.  
35A. Compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences.  
35B. Costs for causing delay.  
PART II  
EXECUTION  
GENERAL  
36.  Application to orders.  
37. Definition of Court which passed a decree.  
COURTS    BY   WHICH    DECREES    MAY   BE   EXECUTED  
38. Court by which decree may be executed.  
39. Transfer of dec ree. 
40. Transfer of decree to Court in another State.  
41. Result of execution proceedings to be certified.  
42. Powers of Court in executing transferred decree.  
43. Execution of decrees passed by Civil Courts in places to which this Code does not extend.  
44. Execution of decrees passed by Revenue Courts in places to which this Code does not extend.  
44A. Execution of decrees passed by Courts in reciprocating territory.  
45. Execution of decrees outside India.  
46. Precepts.  
QUESTIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY COURT EXECUTING DECREE  
47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing decree.  
LIMIT OF TIME FOR EXECUTION  
48. [ Repealed. ]. 
TRANSFEREES AND LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES  
49. Transferee.  3 
 SECTIONS  
50. Legal representative.  
PROCEDURE IN EXECUTION  
51. Powers of Court to enforce execution.  
52. Enforcement of decree against legal representative.  
53. Liability of ancestral property.   
54. Partition of estate or separation of share.  
ARREST AND DETENTION  
55. Arrest and detention.  
56. Prohibition of arrest or detention of wom en in execution of decree for money.  
57. Subsistence -allowance.  
58. Detention and release.  
59. Release on ground of illness.  
ATTACHMENT  
60. Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of decree.  
61. Partial exemption of agricultural produce.  
62. Seizure of property in dwelling house.  
63. Property attached in execution of decrees of several Courts.  
64. Private alienation of property after attachment to be void.  
 
SALE 
65. Purchaser ’s title.  
66. [Repealed .]. 
67. Power for State Government to make rule s as to sales of land in execution of decrees for payment  
of money.  
DELEGATION TO COLLECTOR OF POWER TO EXECUTE DECREES  
AGAINST IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
68. [Repealed. ]. 
69. [ Repealed. ]. 
70. [ Repealed. ]. 
71. [ Repealed. ]. 
72. [ Repealed .]. 
DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS  
73. Proceeds of execution -sale to be rateably distributed among decree -holders.  
RESISTANCE TO EXECUTION  
74. Resistance to execution.  4 
 PART III 
INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
COMMISSIONS  
SECTIONS  
75. Power of Court to issue commissions.  
76. Commission to another Co urt. 
77. Letter of request.  
78. Commissions issued by foreign Courts.  
PART IV  
SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OR PUBLIC  OFFICERS IN  
THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY  
79. Suits by or against Government.  
80. Notice.  
81. Exemption from arr est and personal appearance.  
82. Execution of decree.  
SUITS BY ALIENS AND BY OR AGAINST  FOREIGN  RULERS,  
AMBASSADORS AND ENVOYS  
83. When aliens may sue.  
84. When foreign States may sue.  
85. Persons specially appointed by Government to prosecute or defend o n behalf of foreign Rulers.  
86. Suits against foreign Rulers, Ambassadors and Envoys.  
87. Style of foreign Rulers as parties to suits.  
87A. Definitions of “foreign State ” and “Ruler ” 
SUITS AGAINST RULERS OF FORMER INDIAN STATES  
87B. Application of sections  85 and 86 to Rulers of former Indian States.  
 
INTERPLEADER  
88. Where interpleader -suit may be instituted.  
PART V  
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS  
ARBITRATION  
89. Settlement of disputes outside the Court.  
SPECIAL  CASE 
90. Power to state case for opinion of Court.  
 
PUBLIC NUISANCES AND OTHER WRONGFUL ACTS AFFECTING THE PUBLIC  
 
91. Public nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting the public.  
92. Public charities.  
93. Exercise of powers of Advocate -General outside presidency -towns.  5 PART VI  
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
SECTIONS  
94. Supplemental proceedings.  
95. Compensation for obtaining arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient ground.  
PART VII  
APPEALS  
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL  DECREES  
96. Appeal from original decree.  
97. Appeal from final decree where no appeal from  preliminary decree.  
98.  Decision where appeal heard by two or more Judges.  
99. No decree to be reversed or modified for error or irregularity not affecting merits or jurisdiction.  
99A. No order under section 47 to be reversed or modified unless decision of the case is prejudicially 
affected.  
APPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES  
100. Second appeal.  
100A. No further appeal in certain cases.  
101. Second appeal on no other grounds.  
102. No second appeal in certain cases.  
103. Power of High Court to determine issues of  fact.  
 
APPEALS FROM ORDERS  
104. Orders from which appeal lies.  
105. Other orders.  
106. What Courts to hear appeals.  
GENERAL  PROVISIONS RELATING TO APPEALS  
107. Powers of Appellate Court.  
108. Procedure in appeals from appellate decrees and orders.  
 
APPEALS TO THE SUPREME  COURT  
109. When appeals lie to the Supreme Court.  
       110. [Omitted .]. 
111. [Omitted .]. 
111A. [ Omitted .]. 
112. Savings.  
PART VIII  
REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION  
113. Reference to High Court.  
 6 SECTIONS  
114. Review.  
115. Revision.  
PART  IX 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE HIGH COURTS NOT BEING  
THE COURT OF A JUDICIAL  COMMISSIONER  
116. Part to apply only to certain High Courts.  
117. Application of Code to High Courts.  
118. Execution of decree before ascertainment of costs.  
119. Unautho rised persons not to address Court.  
120. Provisions not applicable to High Court in original civil jurisdiction.  
PART X  
RULES  
121. Effect of rules in First Schedule.  
122. Power of certain High Courts to make rules.  
123. Constitution of Rule s Committees in certain States.  
124. Committee to report to High Court.  
125. Power of other High Courts to make rules.  
126. Rules to be subject to approval.  
127. Publication of rules.  
128. Matters for which rules may provide.  
129. Power of High Courts to make rules as to their original civil procedure.  
130. Power of other High Courts to make rules as to matters other than procedure.  
131. Publication of rules.  
PART XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
132. Exemption of certain women from personal appearance.  
133. Exemption of other persons.  
134. Arrest other than in execution of decree.  
135. Exemption from arrest under civil process.  
135A. Exemption of members of legislative bodies from arrest and detention under civil process.  
136. Procedure where person to be arrested or property to be attach ed is outside district.  
137. Language of subordinate Courts.  
138. Power of High Court to require evidence to be recorded in English.  
139. Oath on affidavit by whom to be administered.  
140. Assessors in causes of salvage, etc.  
141. Miscellaneous proceedings . 
142. Orders and notices to be in writing.  7 SECTIONS  
143. Postage.  
144. Application for restitution.  
145. Enforcement of liability of surety.  
146. Proceedings by or against representatives.  
147. Consent or agreement by persons under disability.  
148. Enlarg ement of time.  
148A. Right to lodge a caveat.  
149. Power to make up deficiency of court -fees. 
150. Transfer of business.  
151. Saving of inherent powers of Court.  
152. Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders.  
153. General power to amend.  
153A. Power to a mend decree or order where appeal is summarily dismissed.  
153B. Place of trial to be deemed to be open Court.  
154. [Repealed. ]. 
155. [ Repealed. ]. 
156. [Repealed. ]. 
157. Continuance of orders under repealed enactments.  
158. Reference to Code of Civil Proced ure and other repealed enactments.  
  8 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
______  
 ORDER  I 
______  
Parties to Suits 
RULES  
 1. Who may be joined as plaintiffs.  
 2. Power of Court to order separate trial.  
 3. Who may be joined as defendants.  
          3A. Power to order separat e trials where joinder of defendants may embarrass or delay trial.  
 4. Court may give judgment for or against one or more of joint parties.  
 5. Defendant need not be interested in all the relief claimed.  
 6. Joinder of parties liable on same contract.  
 7. When plaintiff in doubt from whom redress is to be sought.  
 8. One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same interest.  
    8A. Power of Court to permit a person or body of persons to present opinion or to take part in 
the proceedings.  
      9. Misj oinder and non -joinder.  
     10. Suit in name of wrong plaintiff.  
  Court may strike out or add parties.  
  Where defendant added, plaint to be amended.  
10A. Power of Court to request any pleader to address it.  
  11. Conduct of suit.  
  12. Appearance of one  of several plaintiffs or defendants for others.  
  13. Objections as to non -joinder or misjoinder.  
_______  
ORDER II  
Frame of Suit 
1.  Frame of suit.  
2.  Suit to include the whole claim.  
 Relinquishment of part of claim.  
 Omission to sue for one of several reliefs.  
3.  Joinder of causes of action.  
4.  Only certain claims to be joined for recovery of immovable property.  
5.  Claims by or against executor, administrator or heir.  
6.  Power of Court to order separate trials.  
7.  Objections as to misjoinder.   
____ ___ 
ORDER III  
Recognized Agents and Pleaders  
1.  Appearances, etc., may be in person, by recognised agent or by pleader.  
2.  Recognised agents.  
3.  Service of process on recognised agent.  
4.  Appointment of pleader.  
5.  Service of process on pleader.  
6.  Agent to accept service.  
  Appointment to be in writing and to be filed in Court.  9 ORDER  IV 
Institution of suits  
RULES  
1. Suit to be commenced by plaint.  
2. Register of suits.  
_______  
ORDER V  
Issue and Service of Summons   
Issue of summons  
 1.   Summons.  
 2.  Copy of plaint annexed to summons.  
 3.  Court may order defendant or plaintiff to appear in person.  
 4.  No party to be ordered to appear in person unless resident within certain limits.  
 5.  Summons to be either to settle issues or for final disposal.  
 6.  Fixing day for appearance of defendant.  
 7.  Summons to order defendant to produce documents relied on by him.  
 8.  On issue of summons for final disposal, defendant to be directed to produce his witnesses.  
Service of Summons  
    9. Delivery of summons  by Court.  
      9A. Summons given to the plaintiff for service.  
   10. Mode of service.  
11. Service on several defendants.  
12. Service to be on defendant in person when practicable, or on his agent.  
13. Service on agent by whom defendant carries on busin ess. 
14. Service on agent in charge in suits for immovable property.  
15. Where service may be on an adult member of defendant ’s family.  
16. Person served to sign acknowledgement.  
17. Procedure when defendant refuses to accept service, or cannot be found.  
18. Endorsement of time and manner of service.  
19. Examination of serving officer.  
19A. [ Omitted .].  
20. Substituted  service.  
Effect of substituted service.  
Where service substituted, time for appearance to be fixed.  
20A. [ Repealed .]. 
21. Service of summon s where defendant resides within jurisdiction of another Court.  
22. Service within presidency -towns of summons issued by Courts outside.  
23. Duty of Court to which summons is sent.  10 RULES  
24. Service on defendant in prison.  
25. Service where defendant resi des out of India and has no agent.  
26. Service in foreign territory through Political Agent or Court.  
26A. Summonses to be sent to offi cers to foreign countries.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
27. Service on civil public officer or on servant of railway company or local authority.  
28. Service on soldiers , sailors or airmen.  
29. Duty of person to whom summons is d elivered or sent for service.  
30. Substituti on of letter for summons.  
ORDER VI  
Pleadings  Generally  
1.  Pleading.  
2.  Pleading to state material facts and not evidence.  
3.  Forms of pleading.  
4.  Particulars to be given where necessary.  
5.  [Omitted .]. 
6.  Condition precedent.  
7.  Departure.  
8.  Denial of contract.  
9.  Effect  of document to be stated.  
10.  Malice, knowledge, etc.  
11.  Notice.  
12.  Implied contract, or relation.  
13.  Presumptions of law.  
14.  Pleading to be signed.  
14A. Address for service of notice.  
15.  Verification of pleadings.  
16.  Striking out pleadings.  
17.  Amendment of pleadings.  
18.  Failure to amend after order . 
_______  
ORDER VII  
Plaint  
1.  Particulars to be contained in plaint.  
2.  In money suits.  
3.  Where the subject -matter of the suit  is immovable property.  
4.  When plaintiff sues as representative.  
5.  Defendant ’s interest and liab ility to be shown.  
6.  Grounds of exemption from limitation law.  
7.  Relief to be specifically stated.  11 RULES   
8.  Relief founded on separate grounds.  
9.  Procedure on admitting plaint.  
10.  Return of plaint.  
 Procedure on returning plaint.  
10A.  Power of C ourt to fix a date of appearance in the Court where plaint is to be filed after its 
    return.  
10B. Power of appellate Court to transfer suit to the proper Court.  
11.  Rejection of plaint.  
12.  Procedure on rejecting plaint.  
13. Where rejection of plaint does not preclude presentation of fresh plaint.  
Documents relied on in Plaint  
14. Production of document on which plaintiff sues or relies.  
15. [Omitted .]. 
16. Suits on lost negotiable instruments.  
17. Production of shop -book.  
      Original entry to be ma rked and returned.  
18. [Omitted .]. 
_______  
ORDER VIII  
Written statement, set -off and counter -claim  
1. Written statement.  
     1A. Duty of defend ant to produce documents upon which relief is claimed or relie d upon by him.  
2. New facts must be specially plea ded. 
3. Denial to be specific.  
4. Evasive denial.  
5. Specific denial.  
6. Particulars of set -off to be given in written statement.  
         Effect of set -off. 
6A. Counter -claim by defendant.  
     6B. Counter -claim to be stated.  
     6C. Exclusion of counter -claim.  
     6D. Effect of discontinuance of suit.  
     6E. Default of plaintiff to reply to counter -claim.  
     6F. Relief to defendant where counter -claim succeeds.  
     6G. Rules relating to written statement to apply.  
7. Defence  or set -off founded upon  separate grounds.  
8. New ground of defence.  
8A. [ Omitted .].  
9. Subsequent pleadings.  
10. Procedure when party fails to present written statement called for by Court.  
_______  
ORDER IX  
Appearance  of Parties  and Consequence  of non-Appearance  
1. Parties to a ppear on day fixed in summons for defendant to appear and answer.  12 RULES  
2. Dismissal of suit where summons not served in consequence of plaintiff ’s failure to pay costs.  
3. Where neither party appears suit to be dismissed.  
4. Plaintiff may bring fresh suit or Court  may restore suit to file.  
5. Dismissal of suit where plaintiff after summons returned unserved, fails for seven days  to apply 
for fresh summons.  
6. Procedure when only plaintiff appears.  
   When summons duly served.  
   When summons not duly served.  
   When summ ons served but not in due time.  
7. Procedure where defendant appears on day of adjourned hearing and assigns good cause for 
previous non -appearance.  
8. Procedure where defendant only appears.  
  9.   Decree against plaintiff by default bars fresh suit.  
 10.  Proc edure in case of non -attendance of one or more of several plaintiffs.  
11.  Procedure in case of non -attendance of one or more of several defendants.  
  12.  Consequence of non -attendance, without sufficient cause shown, of party ordered to                    
appear in person.  
 Setting aside Decree ex parte  
  13.    Setting aside decree ex parte against defendant.  
  14.    No decree to be set aside without  notice to opposite party.  
______  
ORDER X  
Examination of Parties by the Court  
1.    Ascertainment whether all egations in pleadings are admitted or denied.  
1A. Direction of the court to opt for any one mode of alternative dispute resolution.  
1B. Appearance before the conciliatory forum or authority.  
1C. Appearance before the court consequent to the failure of efforts of conci liation.  
 2.    Oral examination of party, or companion of party.   
  3.    Substance of ex amination to be written.  
  4.    Consequence of refusal or inability of pleader to answer.  
______  
ORDER XI  
Discovery and Inspection  
1.   Discovery by interrogatories.  
2.   Particular interrogatories to be submitted.  
3.   Costs of interrogatories.  
4.   Form of interrogatories.  
5.   Corporations.  
6.   Objections to interrogatories by answer.  
7.   Setting aside and striking out interrogatories.  
8.   Affidavit in answer, filing.  
9.   Form of affidav it in answer.  
10. No exception to be taken.  
11. Order to answer or answer further.  13 RULES  
12. Application for discovery of documents.  
13. Affidavit of documents.  
14. Production of documents.  
15. Inspection of documents referred to in pleading s or affidavits.  
16. Notice to produce.  
17. Time for inspection when notice given.  
18. Order for inspection.  
19. Verified copies.  
20. Premature discovery.  
21. Non-compliance with order for discovery.  
22. Using answers to interrogatories at trial.  
23. Order to apply to minors.  
______  
ORDER XII  
Admissions  
1. Notice of admission o f case.  
2. Notice to admit documents.  
2A. Document to be deemed to be admitted if not denied after service of notice to admit documents.  
3. Form of notice.  
3A. Power of Court to record admission.  
4. Notice to admit acts.  
5. Form of admissions.  
6. Judgment on admissions.  
7. Affidavit of signature.  
8. Notice to produce documents.  
9. Costs.  
_______  
ORDER XIII  
Production , Impounding and Return of Documents  
1. Original documents to  be produced at or before the settlement of issues.  
2. [Omitted .]. 
3. Rejection of irrelevant or inadmissible docum ents.  
4. Endorsements on documents admitted in evidence.  
5. Endorsements on copies of admitted entries in books, accounts and records.  
6. Endorsements on documents rejected an inadmissible in evidence.  
7. Recording of admitted and return of rejected documents.  
8. Court m ay order any document to be impounded.  
9. Return of admitted documents.  
10. Court may sent for papers from its own records or from other Courts.  
11. Provisions as to documents applied to material objects.  
_______  
ORDER XIV  
settlement of issues and determination of su it on issues of law or on  
Issues agreed upon  
1. Framing of issues.  
2. Court to pronounce judgment on all issues.  14 RULES  
3. Materials from which issues may be framed.  
4. Court may examine witnesses or documents before framing issues.  
5. Power to amend and strike out , issues. 
6. Questions of fact or law may by agreement be stated in form of issues.  
7. Court, if satisfied that agreement was executed in good faith, may pronounce judgment.  
_______  
ORDER XV  
Disposal of the Suit at the First Hearing  
1. Parties not at issue.  
2. One of sever al defendants not at issue.  
3. Parties at issue.  
4. Failure to produce  evidence.  
_______  
ORDER XVI  
Summoning and Attendance of Witnesses  
1. List of witnesses and summons to witnesses.  
1A. Production of witnesses without summons.  
2. Expenses of witness to be paid into Court on applying for summons.  
Experts.  
Scale of expenses.  
Expenses to be directly paid to witnesses.  
3. Tender of expenses to witness.  
4. Procedure where insufficient sum paid in.  
Expenses of witnesses detained more than one day.  
5. Time, place and purpose of  attendance to be specified in summons . 
6. Summons to produce document.  
7. Power to require persons present in Court to give evidence or produce document.  
7A. Summons given to the party for service.  
8. Summons how served.  
9. Time for serving summons.  
10.  Procedure where witness fails to comply with summons.  
11.  If witness appears, attachment may be withdrawn.  
12.  Procedure if witness fails to appear.  
13.  Mode of attachment.  
14.  Court may of its own accord summon as witnesses strangers to suit.  
15.  Duty of persons summoned to give eviden ce or produce document . 
16.  When they may depart.  
17.  Application of rules 10 to 13.  
18.  Procedure where witness apprehended cannot give evidence or produce document.  
19.  No witness to be ordered to attend in person unless resident within certain limits.  
20.  Consequence of refusal of party to give evidence when called on by Court.  
21.  Rules as to witnesses to apply to parties summoned.   15 _______  
ORDER XVI -A 
Attendance of Witnesses  Confined or Detained in Prisons  
RULES  
1. Definitions.  
2. Power to require attendance of prisoners to g ive evidence.  
3. Expenses to be paid into Court.  
4. Power of State Government to exclude certain persons from the operation of rule 2.  
5. Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order in certain cases.  
6. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody.  
7. Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison.  
_______  
ORDER  XVII  
Adjournment  
1. Court may grant time and adjourn hearing.  
      Costs of adjournment.  
2. Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed.  
3. Court may proceed notwithstanding either party fails to produce evidence, etc.  
_______  
ORDER XVIII  
Hearing of the Suit and Examination of Witnesses  
1. Right to begin.  
2. Statement and production of evidence.  
3. Evidence where several issues.  
3A. Party to appear before other witnesses.  
4. Recording of evidenc e. 
5. How evidence shall be taken in appealable cases.  
6. When deposition to be interpreted.  
7. Evidence under section 138.  
8. Memorandum when evidence not taken down by Judge.  
9. When evidence may be taken in English.  
10. Any particular question and answer may be taken down . 
11. Questions objected to and allowed by Court.  
12. Remarks on demeanour of witnesses.  
13. Memorandum of evidence in unappealable cases.  
14. [Omitted .]. 
15. Power to deal with evidence taken before another Judge.  
16. Power to examine witness immediately.  
17. Court may recall and ex amine witness.  
17A. [ Omitted. ]. 
18. Power of Court to inspect.  
19. Power to get statements recorded on commission.  
______  
ORDER XIX  
Affidavits  
1. Power to order any point to be proved by affidavit.  16 RULES  
2. Power to order attendance of deponent for cross -examination.  
3. Matters to which affidavits shall be confined.  
______  
ORDER XX  
Judgment  and Decree  
1. Judgment when pronounced.  
2.  Power to pronounce judgment written by Judge’s predecessor.  
3.  Judgment to be signed.  
4.  Judgments of Small Cause Courts.  
      Judgments of other Courts.  
5.  Court to state its decision on each issue.  
5A.  Court to inform parties as to where an appeal lies in cases where parties are not represented by     
     pleaders.  
6.  Contents of decree.  
6A.  Preparation of Decree.  
6B. Copies of judgment s when to be made available.  
7.   Date of decree.  
8.   Procedure where Judge has vacated office before signing decree.  
9.   Decree for recovery of immovable property.  
10. Decree for delivery of movable property.  
11. Decree may direct payment by instalments . 
      Order, after decree, for payment by instalments.  
12. Decree for possession and mesne  profits.  
12A. Decree for specific performance of contract for the sale or lease of immovable property.  
13. Decree in administration -suit. 
14. Decree in pre -emption -suit. 
15. Decree in suit for dissolution of partnership.  
16. Decree in suit for account between principal and agent.  
17. Special directions as to accounts.  
18. Decree in suit for partition of property or separate possession of a share therein.  
19. Decree when set -off or counter -claim is allowed.  
          Appeal from decree relating to set -off or counter -claim.  
20. Certified copies of judgment and decree to be furnished.  
______  
ORDER XXA  
Costs  
1. Provisions relating to certain items.  
2. Costs to be awarded in a ccordance with the rules made by High Court.   
______  
ORDER XXI  
Execution of Decrees and Orders   
Payment under decree  
1. Modes of paying money under decree.  
2. Payment out of Court to decree -holder.  
 
 
 17 Courts executing decrees  
RULES  
3. Lands situate in more than one  jurisdiction.  
4. Transfer to Court of Small Causes.  
5. Mode of transfer.  
6. Procedure where Court desires that its own decree shall be executed by another Court.  
7. Court receiving copies of decree, etc., to file same without proof.  
8. Execution of decree or order by Co urt to which it is sent.  
9. Execution by High court of decree transferred by other Court.  
Application for execution  
10.  Application for execution.  
11. Oral application.  
Written application.  
11A.  Application for arrest to state grounds.  
12.  Application for attachment of movable property not in judgment -debtor’s possession.  
13.  Application for attachment of immovable property to contain certain particulars.  
14.  Power to require certified extract from Collector’s register in certain cases.  
15.  Application for execution by joint d ecree -holder s. 
16.  Application for execution by transferee of decree.  
17.  Procedure on receiving application for execution of decree.  
18.  Execution in case of cross -decrees.  
19.  Execution in case of cross -claims under same decree.  
20.  Cross -decrees and cross -claims in mo rtgage  suits.  
21.  Simultaneous execution.  
22.  Notice to show cause against execution in certain cases.  
22A.  Sale not to be set aside on the death of the judgment -debtor before the sale but after the service 
of the proclamation of sale.  
23. Procedure after issue of notice.  
 
Process for execution  
24. Process for execution.  
25. Endorsement on process.  
Stay of execution  
26. When Court may stay execution.  
   Power to require security from, or impose conditions upon, judgment -debtor.  
27. Liability of judgment -debtor discharged.  
28. Order of Court which passed decree or of Appellate Court to be binding upon Court applied to.  
29. Stay of execution pending suit between decree -holder and judgment -debtor s. 
 
Mode of execution  
30. Decree for payment of money.  
31. Decree for specific movable prop erty. 18 RULES  
32. Decree for specific performance for restitution of conjugal rights , or for an injunction.  
33. Discretion of Court in executing decrees for restitution of conjugal rights.  
34. Decree for execution of document, or endorsement of negotiable instrument.  
35. Decree for immova ble property.  
36. Decree for delivery of immovable property when in occupancy of tenant.  
37. Discretionary power to permit judgment -debtor to show cause against detention in prison.  
38.  Warrant for arrest to direct judgment -debtor to be brought up.  
39.  Subsistence -allowance.  
40.  Proceedings on appearance of judgment -debtor in obedience to notice or after arrest.  
Attachment of  property  
41. Examination of judgment -debtor as to his property.  
42. Attachment in case of decree for rent or mesne  profits  or other matter, a mount of which to be 
subsequently determined.  
43. Attachment of movable property , other than agricultural produce , in possession of judgment -
debtor.  
43A.   Custody of movable property.  
44. Attachment of agricultural produce.  
45. Provisions as to agricultural produce u nder attachment.  
46. Attachment of debt, share and other property not in possession of judgment -debtor.  
46A. Notice to garnishee.  
46B .  Order against garnishee.  
46C. Trial of disputed questions.  
46D. Procedure where debt belongs to third person.  
      46E. Or der as regards third person.  
46F.  Payment by garnishee to be valid discharge.  
46G. Costs.  
46H. Appeals.  
46I.  A pplication to negotiable instruments.  
47.  Attachment of share in movables.  
48.  Attachment of salary or allowances of servant of the Government or rail way company or local 
authority.  
48A. Attachment of salary or allowances of private employees.  
49.  Attachment of partnership property.  
50.  Execution of decree against firm.  
51.  Attachment of negotiable instruments . 
52. Attachment of property in custody of Court or publi c officer.  
53.  Attachment of decrees.  
54.  Attachment of immovable property.  
55.  Removal of attachment after satisfaction of decree.  
56.  Order for payment of coin or currency notes to party entitled under decree.  
57.  Determination of attachment.  
Adjudication of claims and  objections  
58.  Adjudication of claims to, or objections to attachment , of property.  
 
 
 19 RULES  
59.  Stay of sale.  
60. [Omitted .]. 
61. [Omitted .]. 
62. [Omitted .].  
63. [Omitted .]. 
Sale generally  
64.  Power to order property attached to be sold and proceeds to be paid to person entitle d. 
65.  Sales by whom conducted and how made.  
66.  Proclamation of sales by public auction.  
67.  Mode of making proclamation.  
68. Time of sale.  
69.  Adjournment or stoppage of sale.  
70.  [Omitted .]. 
71.  Defaulting purchaser answerable for loss on re -sale. 
72.  Decree -holder not to bid f or or buy property without permission.  
Where decree -holder purchases, amount of decree may be taken as payment.  
72A. Mortgagee not to bid at sale without the leave of the Court.  
73.  Restriction on bidding or purchase by officers.  
Sale of movable property  
74.  Sale of agricultural produce.  
75.  Special provisions relating to growing crops.  
76.  Negotiable instruments and shares in corporations.  
77.  Sale by public auction.  
78.  Irregularity not to vitiate sale, but any person injured may sue.  
79.  Delivery of movable property, debts a nd shares.  
80.  Transfer of negotiable instruments and shares.  
81.  Vesting order in case of other property.  
Sale of immovable property.  
82.  What Courts may order sales.  
83.  Postponement of sale to enable judgment -debtor to raise amount of decree.  
84.  Deposit by purchaser and re -sale on default.  
85.  Time for payment in full of purchase -money.  
86.  Procedure in default of payment.  
87.  Notification on re -sale. 
88.  Bid of co -sharer to have preference.  
89.  Application to set aside sale on deposit.  
90.  Application to set aside sale on ground of ir regularity or fraud.  
91.  Application by purchaser to set aside sale on ground of judgment -debtor having no saleable interest.  
92.  Sale when to become absolute or be set aside.  
93.  Return of purchase r-money in certain cases.  
94.  Certificate to purchaser.  
95.  Delivery of p roperty in occupancy of judgment -debtor.  
96.  Delivery of property in occupancy of tenant.  
Resistance to delivery of possession to decree -holder or purchaser  
97.  Resistance or obstruction to possession of immovable property.  
98.  Orders after adjudication.  
99.  Disposses sion by decree -holder or purchaser.  20 RULES  
100. Order to be passed upon application complaining of dispossession.  
101. Question to be determined.  
102. Rules not applicable to transferee pendente lite . 
103.  Orders to be treated as decrees.  
104.  Order s under rule 101 or rule 103 t o be subject to the result of pending suit.  
105.  Hearing of application.  
106.  Setting aside orders passed ex parte, etc. 
  ______  
ORDER XXII  
Death, Marriage and Insolvency of Parties  
1. No abatement by party ’s death if right to sue survives.  
2. Procedure where one of se veral plaintiffs or defendants dies and right to sue survives.  
3. Procedure in case of death of one of several plaintiffs or of sole plaintiff.  
4. Procedure in case of death of one of several defendants or of sole defendant.  
4A. Procedure where there is no legal  representative.  
5. Determination of question as to legal representative.  
6. No abatement by reason of death after hearing.  
7. Suit not abated by marriage of female party.  
8. When plaintiffs insolvency bars suit.  
Procedure where assignee fails to continue suit , or giv e security.  
9. Effect of abatement or dismissal.  
10. Procedure in case of assignment before final order in suit.  
10A. Duty of pleader to communicate to Court death of a party.  
11. Application of Order to appeals.  
12. Application of Order to proceedings.  
__ _ __ _ __ _  
ORDER X XIII 
Withdrawal and Adjustment of Suits 
1. Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim.  
1A.When transposition of defendants as plaintiffs may be permitted.  
2. Limitation law not affected by first suit.  
3. Compromise of suit.  
3A. Bar to suit.  
3B. No agreement  or compromise to be entered in a representative suit without leave of Court.  
4. Proceedings in execution of decrees not affected.  
__ _ __ _ __ _  
ORDER XXIV  
Payment into Court 
1. Deposit by defendant of amount in satisfaction of claim.  
2. Notice of deposit.  
3. Interest on deposit not allowed to plaintiff after notice.  
4. Procedure where plaintiff accepts deposit as satisfaction in part.  
Procedure where he accepts it as satisfaction in full.  
 
 21 __ _ __ _ __ _  
ORDER XXV  
Security for Costs  
RULES  
 
1. When security for costs may be required  from plaintiff.  
2. Effect of failure to furnish security.  
__ _ __ _ __ _  
 
ORDER XXVI  
Commissions  
Commissions to examine witnesses  
1. Cases in which Court may issue commission to examine witness.  
2. Order for commission.  
3. Where witness resides within Court ’s jurisdictio n. 
4. Persons for whose examination commission may issue.  
4A. Commission for examination of any person resident within the local limits of the  
        jurisdiction of the Court.  
5.  Commission or request to examine witness not within India.  
6.  Court to exami ne witness pursuant to commission.  
7.  Return of commission with depositions of witnesses.  
8.    When depositions may be read in evidence.  
Commissions for local investigations  
9. Commissions to make local investigations.  
10. Procedure of Commissioner.  
 Report and depositions to be evidence in suit.  
      Commissioner may be examined in person.  
Commissions for scientific investigation, performance of ministerial act  
and sale of movable property  
10A.  Commission for scientific investigation.  
10B.  Commission for performance of a ministerial act.  
10C.  Commission for the sale of movable property.  
Commissions to examine accounts  
11. Commission to examine or adjust accounts.  
12. Court to give Commissioner necessary instructions.  
 Proceedings and report to be evi dence.  
             Court may direct further inquiry.  
Commissions to make partitions.  
13. Commission to make partition of immovable property.  
14.  Procedure of Commissioner.  
General Provisions  
15.  Expenses of commission to be paid into Court.  
16. Powers of Commi ssioners.  
16A. Questions objected to before the Commissioner.  
17. Attendance and examination of witnesses before Commissioner.  
18.  Parties to appear before Commissioner.  
18A.   Application of order to execution proceedings.  
18B.  Court to fix a tim e for return of Commission.  22 Commissions issued of the instance of Foreign Tribunals  
RUL ES 
19. Cases in which High Court may issue commission to examine witness.  
20. Application for issue of commission.  
21. To whom commission may be issued.  
22. Issue, e xecution and return of commissions, and transmission of evidence to foreign Court.  
_______  
ORDER XXVII  
Suits by or against the Government or Public Officers in thei r Official  Capacity  
1.  Suits by or against Government.  
2.  Persons authori sed to act for Go vernment.  
3.  Plaints in suits by or against Government.  
4. Agent for Government to receive process.  
 5.  Fixing of day for appearance on behalf of Government.  
 5A.  Government to be joined as a party in a suit against a public officer.  
 5B. Duty of Court in suits against the Government or a public officer to assist in arriving at a 
  settlement.  
  6.  Attendance of person able to answer questions relating to suit against Government.  
  7.  Extension of time to enable public officer to make reference to Gov ernment.  
8.  Procedure in suits against public officer.  
8A.  No security to be r equired from Government or a public officer in certain cases.  
8B.  Definitions of “Government” and “Government pleader”.  
_______  
ORDER XXVII -A 
Suits Involving a Substantial  Question of Law as to the Interpretation of the Constitution or as to the 
Validity of any Statutory  Instrument  
1. Notice to the Attorney General or the Advocate -General.  
1A.  Procedure in suits involving validity of any statutory instrument.  
2. Court may add  Government as party.  
2A.  Power of Court to add Government or other authority as a defendant in a suit relating to  
the validity of any statutory instrument.  
3.  Costs.  
4.  Application of Order to appeals.  
_______  
ORDER XXVIII  
Suits by or Against  Military or Naval men or Airmen  
1. Officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen who cannot obtain leave may authori se any person to sue 
 or defend for them.  
2. Person so authori sed may act personally or appoint pleader.  
3. Service on person so authori sed, or on his pleade r, to be good service.  
_______  23 RUL ES 
ORDER XXIX  
Suits by or Against corporations  
1.  Subscription and verification of pleading.  
2.  Service on corporation.  
3.  Power to require personal attendance of officer of corporation.  
_______  
ORDER XXX  
Suits by or against Firms and Persons carrying on  
business in names other than their own  
1.  Suing of partners in name of firm.  
2.  Disclosure of partners’ names.  
3.  Service.  
4.  Right s of suit on death of partner.  
5.  Notice in what capacity served.  
6.  Appearance  of partners.  
7.  No appearance except by partners.  
8.  Appearance under protest.  
9.  Suits between co -partners.  
 10.  Suit against person carrying on business in name other than his own.  
_________  
ORDER XXXI  
Suits by or Against  Trustees , Executors and Administrators  
1. Representation of beneficiaries in suits concerning property vested in trustees, etc.  
2. Joinder of trustees, executors and administrators.  
3. Husband of married executrix not to join.  
_______  
ORDER XXXII  
Suits by or Against  Minors and Persons of Unsound  Mind 
1.  Minor to sue by next friend.  
2.  Where suit is instituted without next friend, plaint to be taken off the file.  
2A. Security to be furnished by next friend when so ordered.  
3. Guardian for the suit to be appointed by Court for minor defendant.  
3A. Decree against minor not to be set aside unless prejudice has been caused to his interest.  
4.  Who may act as next friend or be appointed guardian for the suit.  
5. Representation of minor by next friend or guardian for the suit.  
6. Receipt b y next friend or guardian for the suit of property under decree for minor.  
7.  Agreement or compromise by next friend or guardian for the suit.  
8. Retirement of next friend.  
9. Removal of next friend.  
10. Stay of proceedings on removal, etc., of next frien d. 
11.  Retirement, removal or death of guardian for the suit.  
12. Course to be followed by minor plaintiff or applicant on attaining majority.  
13. Where minor co -plaintiff attaining majority desires to repudiate suit.  
14. Unreasonable or improper suit.  
15. Rules 1 to 14 (except rule 2A) to apply to persons of unsound mind.  24 RUL ES 
16. Savings.  
_______  
ORDER XXXIIA  
Suits Relating to Matters  Concerning the Family  
1.  Application of the Order.  
2.  Proceedings to be held in camera.  
3.  Duty of Court to make eff orts for settlement.  
4.  Assistance of welfare expert.  
5.  Duty to enquire into facts.  
6.  “Family” —Meaning of.  
_______  
ORDER XXXIII  
  Suits by Indigent  Persons  
1. Suits may be instituted by indigent persons.  
1A. Inquiry into the means of an indigent perso n. 
2. Contents of application.  
3. Presentation of application.  
4.  Examination of applicant.  
 If presented by agent, Court may order applicant to be examined by commission.  
5. Rejection of application.  
6. Notice of day for receiving evidence of applicant ’s indigency.  
7. Procedure at hearing.  
8. Procedure if application admitted.  
9. Withdrawal of permission to sue as an indigent person.  
9A. Court to assign a pleader to an unrepresented indigent person.  
10. Costs where indigent person succeeds.  
11. Procedure where indigent person fails.  
11A. Procedure where indigent person ’s suit abates.  
12. State Government may apply for payment of court -fees.  
13. State Government to be deemed a party.  
14. Recovery of amount of court -fees.  
15. Refusal to allow applicant to su e as an indigent person to bar subsequent application of like 
 nature.  
15A.  Grant of time for payment of court -fee. 
16. Costs.  
17. Defence by an indigent person.  
18.  Power of Government to provide for free legal services to indigent persons.  
_______  
ORDER  XXXIV  
Suits Relating to Mortgages of Immovable  Property  
1. Parties to suits for foreclosure, sale and redemption.  
2. Preliminary decree in foreclosure -suit. 
3. Final decree in foreclosure -suit. 
4. Preliminary decree in suit for sale.  
 Power to decree sal e in foreclosure -suit. 
5. Final decree in suit for sale.  
6. Recovery of balance due on mortgage in suit for sale.  25 RUL ES 
7. Preliminary decree in redemption suit.  
8. Final decree in redemption suit.  
8A. Recovery of balance due on mortgage in suit for redemp tion. 
9. Decree where nothing is found due or where mortgagee has been overpaid.  
10. Costs of mortgagee subsequent to decree.  
10A.  Power of Court to direct mortgagee to pay mesne profits.  
11.  Payment of interest.  
12.  Sale of property subject to prior mor tgage.  
13.  Application of proceeds.  
14. Suit for sale necessary for bringing mortgaged property to sale.  
15. Mortgages by the deposit of title -deeds and charges.  
_______  
ORDER XXXV  
Interpleader  
1. Plaint in interpleader -suit. 
2.  Payment of thing claime d into Court.  
3.  Procedure where defendant is suing plaintiff.  
4.  Procedure at first hearing.  
5.  Agents and tenants may not institute interpleader -suits.  
6.  Charge for plaintiff's costs.  
_______  
ORDER XXXVI  
Special  Case 
1. Power to state case for Court ’s opinion.  
2. Where value of subject -matter must be stated.  
3. Agreement to be filed and registered as suit.  
4. Parties to be subject to Court's jurisdiction.  
5. Hearing and disposal of case.  
6. No appeal from a decree passed under rule 5.  
_______  
ORDER XXXVII  
Summary  Procedure  
1.  Courts and classes of suits to which the Order is to apply.  
2. Institution of summary suits.  
3. Procedure for the appearance of defendant.  
4. Power to set aside decree.  
5. Power to order bill, etc., to be deposited with office r of Court.  
6. Recovery of cost of noting non -acceptance of dishonoured bill or note.  
7. Procedure in suits.  
_______  
ORDER XXXVIII  
Arrest and Attachment before Judgment   
Arrest before Judgment  
1. Where defendant may be called upon to furnish security for a ppearance.  
2. Security.  26 RUL ES 
3. Procedure on application by surety to be discharged.  
4. Procedure where defendant fails to furnish security or find fresh security.  
Attachment before Judgment  
5. Where defendant may be called upon to furnish security for p roduction of property.  
6. Attachment where cause not shown or security not furnished.  
7. Mode of making attachment.  
8. Adjudication of claim to property attached before judgment.  
9. Removal of attachment when security furnished or suit dismissed.  
10. Attac hment before judgment not to affect rights of strangers, nor bar decree -holder from  
 applying for sale.  
11. Property attached before judgment not to be re -attached in execution of decree.  
11A.  Provisions applicable to attachment.  
12. Agricultural produce n ot attachable before judgment.  
13. Small Cause Court not to attach immovable property.  
ORDER XXXIX  
Temporary  Injunctions and Interlocutory  Orders  
Temporary injunctions  
1. Cases in which temporary injunction may be granted.  
2.  Injunction to restrain repeti tion or continuance of breach.  
2A. Consequence of disobedience or breach of injunction.  
3. Before granting injunction, Court to direct notice to opposite party.  
3A. Court to dispose of application for injunction within thirty days.  
4. Order for injunction may be discharged, varied or set aside.  
5. Injunction to corporation binding on its officers.  
Interlocutory orders  
6. Power to order interim sale.  
7. Detention, preservation, inspection, etc., of subject -matter of suit.  
8. Application for such orders to b e after notice.  
9. When party may be put in immediate possession of land the subject -matter of suit.  
10.  Deposit of money, etc., in Court.  
_______  
ORDER XL  
Appointment of Receivers  
1. Appointment of receivers . 
2. Remuneration.  
3. Duties.  
4. Enforcement of  receiver ’s duties.  
5. When Collector may be appointed receiver.  
_______  
ORDER XLI  
Appeals from Original  Decrees  
1. Form of appeal.  
 What to accompany memorandum.  
 Contents of memorandum.  27 RULES  
2.   Grounds which may be taken in appeal.  
3. Rejection or ame ndment of memorandum.  
3A. Application for condonation of delay.  
4. One of several plaintiffs or defendants may obtain reversal of whole decree where it proceeds  
   on ground common to all.  
Stay of proceedings and of execution  
5. Stay by Appellate Court.  
 Stay by Court which passed the decree.  
6. Security in case of order for execution of decree appealed from.  
7. [Repealed. ]. 
8. Exercise of powers in appeal from order made in execution of decree.  
Procedure on admission of appeal  
9. Registry of memorandum of appeal.  
10.  Appellate Court may require appellant to furnish security for costs.  
   Where appellant resides out of  India.  
11.  Power to dismiss appeal without sending notice to Lower Court.  
11A.  Time within which hearing under rule 11 should be conclud ed. 
12.  Day for hearing appeal.  
13.  [Omitted .]. 
14.  Publication and service of notice of day for hearing appeal.  
 Appellate Court may itself cause notice to be served.  
15.  [Omitted .]. 
Procedure on hearing  
16.  Right to begin.  
17.  Dismissal of appeal for appellant's default.  
Hearing appeal ex parte.  
18.  [Omitted .]. 
19. Re-admission of appeal dismissed for default.  
20. Power to adjourn hearing and direct persons appearing interested to be made respondents.  
21.  Re-hearing on application of respondent against whom ex parte decree made.  
22.  Upon hearing respondent may object to decree as if he had preferred a separate appeal.  
    Form of objection and provisions applicable thereto.  
23. Remand of case by Appellate Court.  
23A.  Remand in other cases.  
24.  Where evidence on record sufficient, Appellate Court may determine case finally.  
25.  Where Appellate Court may frame issues and refer them for trial to Court whose decree  
    appealed from.  
26. Findings and evidence to be put on record.  
   Objections to finding s. 
      Determination of appeal.  28 RU L E S 
26A.  Order of remand to mention date of next hearing  
27. Production of additional evidence in Appellate Court.  
28. Mode of taking additional evidence.  
29.  Points to be defined and recorded.  
Judgment in appeal  
30.  Judgment when and where pronounced.  
31.  Contents, date and signature of judgment.  
32.  What judgment may direct.  
33.  Power of Court of appeal.  
34.  Dissent to be recorded.  
Decree in appeal  
35. Date and contents of decree.  
 Judge dissenting from jud gment need not sign decree.  
36. Copies of judgment and decree to be furnished to parties.  
37. Certified copy of decree to be sent to Court whose decree appealed from.  
_______  
ORDER XLII  
Appeals from Appellate  Decrees  
1. Procedure.  
2. Power of Court to dire ct that the appeal be heard on the question formulated by it.  
3. Application of rule 14 of Order XL L. 
_______  
ORDER XLIII  
Appeals from Orders  
1. Appeals from orders.   
1A. Right to challenge non -appealable orders in appeal against decrees.  
2. Procedure.  
_______ 
ORDER XLIV  
Appeals by Indigent  Persons  
1. Who may appeal as an indigent person.  
2. Grant of time for payment of Court -fee. 
3. Inquiry as to whether applicant is an indigent person.  
                                                                                                       _______  
ORDER XLV  
 Appeals  to the Supreme  Court 
1. “Decree” defined.  
2. Application to Court whose decree complained of.  
3. Certificate as to value or fitness.  
4. [Repealed. ]. 
5. [Repealed. ]. 
6. Effect of refusal of certif icate.  
7. Security and deposit required on grant of certificate.  
8. Admission of appeal and procedure thereon.  29 RULES  
9. Revocation of acceptance of security.  
9A. Power to dispense with notices in case of deceased parties.  
10.  Power to order further securi ty or payment.  
11. Effect of failure to comply with order.  
12.  Refund of balance deposit.  
13. Powers of Court pending appeal.  
14. Increase of security found inadequate.  
15.  Procedure to enforce orders of the Supreme Court.  
16.  Appeal from order relating  to execution.  
17.  [Repealed. ]. 
ORDER XLVI  
Reference  
1. Reference of question to High Court.  
2. Court may pass decree contingent upon decision of High Court.  
3. Judgment of High Court to be transmitted, and case disposed of accordingly.  
4. Costs of refere nce to High Court.  
4A. Reference to High Court under proviso to section 113.  
5. Power to alter, etc., decree of Court making reference.  
6. Power to refer to High Court questions as to jurisdiction in small causes.  
7. Power to District Court to submit for r evision proceeding had under mistake as to jurisdiction in 
small causes.  
_______  
ORDER XLVII  
Review  
1. Application for review of judgment.  
2. [Repealed. ]. 
3. Form of applications for review.  
4. Application where rejected.  
Application where granted.  
5. Application for review in Court consisting of two or more Judges.  
6. Application where rejected.  
7. Order of rejection not appealable.  
      Objections to order granting application.  
8. Registry of application granted, and order for re -hearing s. 
9. Bar of ce rtain applications.  
_______  
ORDER XLVIII  
Miscellaneous  
1. Process to be served at expense of party issuing.  
 Costs of service.  
2. Orders and notices how served.  
3. Use of forms in appendices.  
_______  
ORDER XLIX  
Chartered  High Courts  
1. Who may serve proce sses of High Court.  30 RULES  
2. Saving in respect of Chartered High Courts.  
3. Application of rules.  
_______  
ORDER L  
Provincial  Small Cause Courts  
1. Provincial Small Cause Courts.  
_______  
ORDER LI  
Presidency  Small Cause Courts  
     1. Presidency Small Cause Courts.  
 
 APPENDIX —  A. PLEADINGS.   
 APPENDIX —  B. PROCESS.  
 APPENDIX — C. DISCOVERY, INSPECTION AND ADMISSION.  
 APPENDIX  — F. DECREES.  
 APPENDIX  — G. EXECUTION.  
 APPENDIX  — H. SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS.  
 APPENDIX —   I. MISCELLANEOUS.   
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . — [Repealed ].  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. —[Repealed ].  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. — [Repealed ].  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. — [Repealed ].  
ANNEXURE  I 
 
  31 THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908  
ACT NO. 5 OF 19081 
[21st March, 1908.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relati ng to the procedure of the Courts of Civil  
Judicature.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the procedure of the Courts 
of Civil Judicature: It is hereby enacted as follows :  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and ex tent. —(1) This Act may be cited as the Code of Civil 
Procedure,  1908.  
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of January, 1909.  
 
  
                                                      
 
1. This Act has been amended in its application to Assam by Assam Acts 2 of 1941 and 3 of 1953; to Tamil Nadu by 
Madras Act 34 of 1950, Madras A. O. 1950, and Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1970; to Punjab by Punjab Act 7 of 1934; to Uttar 
Pradesh by U.P. Acts 4 of 1925, 35 of 1948, 24 of 1954, 17 of 1970, 57 of 1976 and 31 of 1978; to Karnataka by Mysore 
Act 14 of 1955; to Kerala by Kerala Act 13 of 1957; to  Rajasthan by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1958; to Maharashtra by 
Maharashtra Act 22 of 1960 and 25 of 1970; It has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) and, by 
notification under ss. 5 and 5A of the Schedule Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 18 74), also to the following Scheduled                 
Districts: —  
(1) The district of Jalpaiguri, Cachar (excluding the North Cachar Hills , Goalpara (including the Eastern Duars), 
Kamrup, Darrang, Nowgong (excluding the Mikir Hill Tracts) Sibsagar (excludi ng the Mikir Hill Tracts) and 
Lakhimpur (excluding the Dibrugarh Frontier Tracts): Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. 1. p. 5 and ibid, 1914, Pt . I,    
p. 1690.  
(2) The District of Darjeeling and the District of Hazaribagh, Ranchi, Palamau and Manbhum in Chota Na gpur: 
Calcutta Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 25 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 33.  
(3) The Province of Kumaon and Garhwal and the Tarai Parganas (with modifications): U.P. Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 3 
and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 31.  
(4) The Parga na of Jaunsar -Bawar in Dehradun and the Scheduled portion of the Mirzapur District : U.P. Gazette, 
1909, Pt. I, p. 4 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 32.  
(5) Coorg: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 32.  
(6) Scheduled Districts in the Punjab: Gazette o f India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 33.  
(7) Sections 36 to 43 to all the Scheduled Districts in Madras, Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I. , p. 152.  
(8) Scheduled Districts in the C.P., except so much as is already in force and so much as authorizes the 
attachment and sal e of immovable property in execution of a decree, not being a decree directing the sale of such 
property: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 239.  
(9) Ajmer -Merwara except ss. 1 and 155 to 158: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. II, p. 480.  
(10) Pargana Dhalbhum, t he Municipality of Chaibassa in the Kolhan and the Porahat Estate in the 
District of Singhbhum: Calcutta, Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 453 and Gazette of India, 1909 , Pt. I, p. 443.  
Under s. 3(3)(a) of the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation (3 of 1872), ss. 38 to 42 and 156 and rules 
4 to 9 in Order XXI in the First Schedule have been declared to be in force in the Sonthal Parganas and the 
rest of the Code for the trial of suits referred to in s. 10 of the Sonthal Parganas Justice Regulation,            
1893 (5 of 1893): see Calcutta, Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 45.  
It has been declared to be in force in Panth Piploda by the Panth Piploda Laws Regulation ,                  
1929 (1 of 1929), s. 2; in the Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulatio n, 1936 (4 of 1936), s. 3 
and Sch. and in the Angul District by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 and Sch.  
It has been extended to the District of Koraput and Ganjam Agency by Orissa Regulation (5 of 1951) , s.2. 
It has been extended to the State of Manipur (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) by Act 30 of 1950, s. 3 to the whole of the 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967) by Regulation 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.: to Goa, Daman and 
Diu (w.e.f. 15 -6-1966) by Act 30 of 1965, s. 3; to Dadra and Nagar Ha veli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 
1963, s. 2 and Sch. 1 and to the State of Sikkim (w.e.f. 1 -9-1984),  vide Notification No. S.O. 599 (E),        
dated 13 -8-1984, Gazette of India , Extraordinary., Part. II, s. 3.  
 32  1[(3) It extends to the whole of India except —  
2*     *          *       *   * 
(b) the State of Nagaland and the trib al areas : 
Provided that the State Government concerned may, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend the   
provisions of this Code or any of them to the whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, 
as the case may be, with such supple mental, incidental or consequential modifications as may be specified 
in the notification.  
Explanation . — In this clause, “tribal areas ” means the territories which, immediately before the    
21st day of January , 1972 , were included in the tribal areas of Assam as referred to in paragraph 20 of the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.  
(4) In relation to the Amindivi Islands, and the East Godavari, West Godavari and Visakhapatnam 
Agencies in the State of Andhra Pradesh and the Union Territory of Lakshadweep, the application of this 
Code shall be without prejudice to the application of any rule or regulation for the time being in force in such 
Islands, Agencies or such Union Territory, as the case may be, relating to the application of this Code.]  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, —  
       (1) “Code ” includes rules;  
(2) “decree ” means the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as regards the Court 
expressing it, conclusively determines the righ ts of the parties with regard to all or any of the matters in 
controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or final. It shall be deemed to include the rejection 
of a plaint and the determination of any question within 3*** section 144, but shall n ot include —  
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an order, or  
(b) any order of dismissal for default.  
Explanation. —A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to be taken before the suit 
can be completely disposed of.  It is final when such adjudication completely disposes of the suit.       
It may be partly preliminary and partly final;  
(3) “decree -holder ” means any person in whose favour a decree has been passed or an order 
capable of execution has been made;  
(4) “district” means the local limits of the jurisdiction of a principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction (hereinafter called a “District Court ”), and includes the local limits of the ordinary 
original civil jurisdiction of a High Court;  
4[(5) “foreign Court ” means a Court situate outside India and not established or continued by the 
authority of the Central Government;]  
(6) “foreign judgment ” means the judgment of a foreign Court;  
(7) “Government  Pleader ” includes any officer appointed by the State Government to perform all 
or any of the functions expressly imposed by this Code on the Government Pleader and also any 
pleader acting under the directions of the Government Pleader;  
5[(7A) “High Court ” in relation to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, m eans the High C ourt in 
Calcutta;  
(7B) “India ”, except in sections 1, 29, 43, 44, 6[44A, ] 78, 79, 82, 83 and 87A, means the territory 
of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir;]  
(8) “Judge ” means the presiding officer of a Civil Court;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 2, for su b-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
3. The words and figures “section 47 or” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 4, for clause 5 (w .e.f. 1 -4-1951).   
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) .  
6. Ins. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Schedule  (w.e.f. 23 -12-1953).  33        (9) “judgmen t” means the statement given by the Judge of the grounds of a decree or order;  
(10) “judgment -debtor ” means any person against whom a decree has been passed or an order 
capable of execution has been made;  
(11) “legal representative ” means a person who in law repres ents the estate of a deceased person, 
and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is  
sued in a representative character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so 
suing or sued ; 
(12) “mesne  profits ” of property means those profits which the person in wrongful possession of 
such property actually received or might with ordinary diligence have received therefrom, together 
with interest on such profits, but shall not include profit s due to improvements made by the person in 
wrongful possession;  
(13) “movable property ” includes growing crops;  
(14) “order ” means the formal expression of any decision of a Civil Court which is not a decree;  
(15) “pleader ” means any person entitled to ap pear and plead for another in Court, and includes an 
advocate, a vakil and an attorney of a High Court;  
(16) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules;  
(17) “public officer ” means a person falling under any of the following descriptions, namely : —  
(a) every Judge;  
(b) every member of  1[an All -India Service];  
(c) every commissioned or gazetted officer in the military 2[naval or air] forces of.  3[the Union] 
4*** while serving under the Government;  
(d) Every officer of a court of Justice whose duty it is, as su ch officer, to investigate or report on 
any matter of law or fact, or to make, authenticate or keep any document, or to take charge or 
dispose of any property, or to execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to 
interpret, or to preserve o rder, in the Court, and every person especially authorised by a court of 
Justice to perform any of such duties;  
(e) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep any 
person in confinement;  
(f) every officer of the Go vernment whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to give 
information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, safety or 
convenience;  
(g) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property 
on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of the 
Government, or to execute any revenue process, or to investigate, or to report on, any matter 
affecting the pecuniary interests of the G overnment, or to make, authenticate or keep any document 
relating to the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent the infraction of any law for the 
protection of the pecuniary interests of the Government; and  
(h) every officer in the service or  pay of the Government, or remunerated by fees or commission 
for the performance of any public duty;  
(18) “rules ” means rules and forms contained in the First Schedule or made under section 122 or 
section 125;  
(19) “share in a corporation ” shall be deemed to include stock, debenture stock, debentures or 
bonds; and  
(20) “signed ”, save in the case of a judgment or decree, includes stamped.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 3, for “the Indian Civil Service” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch edule , for “or naval”.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “his Majesty”.  
4. The words “including His Majesty’s Indian Marine Service” omitted by Act  35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch edule . 34  
1*     *   *   *   * 
3. Subordination of Courts. —For the purposes of this Code, the District Court is subordinate to the  
High Court, and every Civil Court of a grade inferior to that of a District Court and every Court of Small 
Causes is subordinate to the High Court and District Court.  
4. Savings. —(1) In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, nothing in thi s Code shall be 
deemed to limit or otherwise affect any special or local law now in force or any special jurisdiction or 
power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by or under any other  law for the time 
being in force.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the proposition contained in sub -section  (1), 
nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any remedy which a landholder or 
landlord may have under any law for the time being in force for the recovery of rent of agricultural land 
from the produce of such land.  
5. Application of the Code to Revenue Courts. —(1) Where any Revenue Courts are governed by 
the provisions of this Code in those matters of procedure upon which any special enactment appli cable to 
them is silent, the State Government 2*** may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any 
portions of those provisions which are not expressly made applicable by this Code shall not apply to those 
Courts, or shall only apply to them  with such modifications as the State Government  3*** may prescribe.  
(2) “Revenue Court ” in sub -section (1) means a Court having jurisdiction under any local law to 
entertain suits or other proceedings relating to the rent, revenue or profits of land used for 
agricultural purposes, but does not include a Civil Court having original jurisdiction under this Code 
to try such suits or proceedings as being suits or proceedings of a civil nature.  
6. Pecuniary jurisdiction. —Save  in so far as is otherwise expressly  provided, nothing herein 
contained shall operate to give any Court jurisdiction over suits the amount or value of the subject -matter 
of which exceeds the pecuniary limits (if any) of its ordinary jurisdiction.  
7. Provincial Small Cause Courts. —The followi ng provisions shall not extend to Courts 
constituted under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887(9 of 1887) 4[or under the Berar Small 
Cause Courts Law, 1905], or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes 5[under the 
said Act o r Law], 6[or to Courts in 7[any part of India to which the said Act does not extend] exercising a 
corresponding jurisdiction that is to say ,—  
(a) so much of the body of the Code as relates to —  
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Ca uses;  
(ii) the execution of decrees in such suits;  
(iii) the execution of decrees against immovable property; and  
(b) the following sections, that is to say, —  
section 9,  
section s 91 and 92 , 
sections 94 and 95 8[so far as they authorize or relate to] — 
 (i) orders for the attachment of immovable property,  
(ii) injunctions,  
                                                      
1. Clause (21)  omitted by Act 2 of 1951, s. 4 , Earlier Clause  (21) ins. by the A.O. 1950 .  
2. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C”, omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Sch edule  Pt. I.  
3. The words “with the sanction aforesaid” omitted by s. 2 and the First Sch edule  Pt. I, ibid. 
4. Ins. by Act 4 of 1941, s. 2 and the Third Sch edule . 
5. Subs. by s. 2 and the Third Sch edule ., ibid., for “under that Act”.  
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 5.  
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.   
8. Subs. by Act 1 of 1926, s. 3, for “so far as they relate to inju nctions and interlocutory orders” .  35 (iii) the appointment of a receiver of immovable property, or  
(iv) the interlocutory orders to in clause (e) of section 94], and section s 96 to 112 and 115.  
8. Presidency Small Cause Court s.—Save  as provided in sections 24, 38 to 41, 75, clauses (a), (b) 
and (c), 76, 1[77, 157 and 158], and by the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882), the 
provisions in the body of this Code shall not extend to any suit or proceeding in any C ourt of Small 
Causes established in the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay:  
2[Provided that —  
(1) the High Courts of Judicature at Fort William, Madras and Bombay, as the case may be, may 
from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct3 that any such provisions not 
inconsistent with the express provisions of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882), 
and with such modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification, shall extend to suits 
or proceedings o r any class of sui ts or proceedings in such Court ; 
(2) all rules heretofore made by any of the said High Courts under section 9 of the Presidency 
Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882) shall be deemed to have been validly made.]  
PART I  
SUITS IN GENERAL  
JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS  AND Res Judicata  
9. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred. —The Courts shall (subject to the provisions herein 
contained) have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is 
either expressly or impliedly barred.  
4[Explanation I].—A suit in which the right to property or to an office is contested is a suit of a civil 
nature, notwithstanding that such right may depend entirely on the decision of questions as to religious 
rites or ce remonies. 
5[Explanation  II].—For the purposes of this section, it is immaterial whether or not any fees are attached 
to the office referred to in Explanation I or whether or not such office is attached to a particular place.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra .— 
Section 9A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in its application to the State of Maharashtra 
(hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), shall be deleted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 61 of 2018, sec. 2.]   
Notwithstanding the deletion of section 9A of the principal Act ,— 
(1) where consideration of a preliminary issue framed under section 9A is pending on the date of 
commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018  (hereinafter, in this 
section, referred to as “the Amendment Act”), the said issue shall be deemed to be an issue framed under 
Order XIV of the principal Act and shall be decided by the Court, as it deems fit, along with all other 
issues, at the time of final disposal of the suit itself :  
Provided that, the evidence , if any, led by any party or parties to the suit, on the preliminary issue so 
framed under section 9A, shall be considered by the Court along with evidence, if any, led on other issues 
in the suit, at the time of final disposal of the suit itself ;  
(2) in all the cases, where a preliminary issue framed under section 9A has been decided, holding that 
the Court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit, and a challenge to such decision is pending before a 
revisional Court, on the date of commencement of the Ame ndment Act, such revisional proceedings shall 
stand abated :  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 4, for “77 and 155 to 158” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Added by Act 1 of 1914, s. 2.  
3. For instance of such direction, see Calcutta Gazette, 1910, Pt. I, p.  814. 
4. Explanation  renumbered as  Explanation I thereof by Act 104 of 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  36 Provided t hat, where a decree in such suit is appealed from any error, defect or irregularity in the order 
upholding jurisdiction shall be treated as one of the ground of objection in the memoran dum of appeal as 
if it had been included in such memorandum;  
(3) in all cases, where a preliminary issue framed under section 9A has been decided, holding that the 
Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, and a challenge to such decision  is pending  before an 
appellate or revisional Court, on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, such appellate or 
revisional proceedings shall continue as if the Amendment Act has not been enacted and section 9A has 
not been deleted :  
Provided that, in case th e appellate or revisional Court, while partly allowing such appeal or revision, 
remands the matter to the trial Court for reconsideration of the preliminary issue so  framed under                
section 9A, upon receipt of these proceedings by the trial Cou rt, all the provisions of the principal Act 
shall  apply ;  
(4) in all cases, where an order granting an ad -interim relief has been passed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 9A prior to its deletion, such order shall be deemed to be an ad -interim order made u nder Order 
XXXIX of the principal Act and the Court shall, at the time of deciding the application in which such an 
order is made, either confirm or vacate or modify such order.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 61 of 2018, sec. 3.]   
Maharashtra. — 
In section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018, for clause ( 1), the 
following clause shall be substituted  and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from 27th 
June 2018, being the date of commencement of the said Act, namely :— 
“(1) where consideration of a preliminary issue framed under section 9A is pending on the date of 
commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018 (hereinafter, in this 
section, referred to as “the Amendment Act”), the said issue shall be decided and disposed of by the Court 
under section 9A, as if the said section 9A has not been deleted;”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 72 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -6-2018.)]   
10. Stay of suit. —No Court shall proceed with the trial of any suit in which the  matter in issue is also 
directly and substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between the same parties, or between 
parties under whom they or any of them claim litigating under the same title where such suit is pending in 
the same or any oth er Court in 1[India] have jurisdiction to grant the relief claimed, or in any Court 
beyond the limits of 1[India] established or continued by 2[the Central Government 3***.] and having like 
jurisdiction, or before 4[the Supreme Court].  
Explanation. —The pendency of a suit in a foreign Court does not preclude the Courts in  1[India] from 
trying a suit founded on the same cause of action.  
11. Res judicata.—No Court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially 
in issue has been dire ctly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties, or between 
parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, in a Court competent to try 
such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been s ubsequently raised, and has been heard and 
finally decided by such Court.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the G.G. in C.”  
3. The words “or the Crown Representative” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “His Majesty in Council”.  37 Explanation I. —The expression “former suit ” shall denote a suit which has been decided prior to a suit 
in question whether or not it was instituted prior thereto.  
Explanation II .—For the purposes of this section, the competence of a Court shall be determined 
irrespective of any provisions as to a right of appeal from the decision of such Court.  
Explanation III. —The matter above referred to must in the former suit have been alleged by one party 
and either denied or admitted, expressly or impliedly, by the other.  
Explanation  IV.—Any matter which might and ought to have been made ground of defence or attack 
in such former suit shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantial ly in issue in such suit.  
Explanation V.—Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not expressly granted by the decree, shall 
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to have been refused.  
Explanation VI .—Where  persons litigate bona fide in respect of a public right or of a private right 
claimed in common for themselves and others, all persons interested in such right shall, for the purposes 
of this section, be deemed to claim under the persons so litigating .  
1[Explanation VI I.—The provisions of this s ection shall apply to a proceeding for the execution of a decree 
and references in this section to any suit, issue or former suit shall be construed as references, respectively, to a 
proceeding for the execution of the decree, question arising in such proc eeding and a former proceeding for the 
execution of that decree.  
Explanation VIII. —An issue heard and finally decided by a Court of limited jurisdiction, competent to 
decide such issue, shall operate as res judicata in a subsequent suit, notwithstanding t hat such Court of 
limited jurisdiction was not competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been 
subsequently raised.]  
12. Bar to further suit . —Where a pla intiff is precluded by rules from instituting a further suit in 
respect  of any particular cause of action, he shall not be entitled to institute a suit in respect of such cause 
of action in any Court to which this Code applies.  
13. When foreign judgment not conclusive. —A foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any 
matter t hereby directly adjudicated upon between the same parties or between parties under whom they or 
any of them claim litigating under the same title except —  
(a) where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction;  
(b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case;  
(c) where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded on an incorrect view of 
international law or a refusal to recognise the law of 2[India] in cases in which such law is applicable;  
(d) where the proceedings i n which the judgment was obtained are opposed to natural justice;  
(e) where it has been obtained by fraud;  
(f) where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in  2[India] . 
14. Presumption as to foreign judgments. —The Court shall presume u pon the production of any 
document purporting to be a certified copy of a foreign judgment , that such judgment was pronounced by 
a Court of competent jurisdiction, unless the contrary appears on the record ; but such presumption may be 
displaced  by proving want of jurisdiction.  
PLACE  OF SUING  
15. Court in which suits to be instituted. —Every  suit shall be instituted in the Court of the lowest 
grade competent to try it.  
16. Suits to be instituted where subject -matter situate. —Subject  to the pecuniary or other 
limitations prescribed by any law, suits —  
(a) for the r ecovery of immovable property with or without rent or profits , 
(b) for the partition of immovable property,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 38 (c)  for foreclosure , sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage of or charge upon immovab le 
property,  
(d) or the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property,  
(e) for compensation for wrong to immovable property,  
(f) for the recovery of movable property actually under distraint or attachment,  
shall be instituted in the  Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate:  
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property 
held by or on behalf of the defendant may, where the relief sought can be entir ely obtained through his 
personal obedience, be instituted either in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
property is situate , or in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and 
voluntarily resid es, or carries on business, or personally works for gain.  
Explanation. —In this section “property ” means property situate in 1[India].  
17.  Suits for immovable property situate within jurisdiction of different Courts. —Where  a suit is to 
obtain relief respec ting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property situate within the jurisdiction of 
different Courts , the suit may be instituted in any Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any 
portion of the property is situate :  
Provided that, in res pect of the value of the subject -matter of the suit, the entire claim is cognizable 
by such Court.  
18. Place of Institution of suit where local limits of jurisdiction of Courts ar e              
uncertain .— (1) Where it is alleged to be uncertain within the  local limits of the jurisdiction of which of 
two or more Courts , any immovable property is situate, any one of those Courts may, if satisfied that 
there is ground for the alleged uncertainty, record a statement to that effect and thereupon proceed to 
entertain and dispose of any suit relating to that property, and its decree in the suit shall have the same 
effect as if the property were situate within the local limits of its jurisdiction:  
Provided that the suit is one with respect to which the Court is com petent as regards the nature and 
value of the suit to exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) Where a statement has not been recorded under sub -section ( 1), and an  objection is taken before 
an Appellate or Revisional Court that a decree or order in a suit relating to s uch property was made by a 
Court not having jurisdiction where the property is situate, the Appellate or Revisional Court shall not 
allow the objection unless in its opinion there was, at the time of the institution of the suit, no reasonable 
ground for un certainty as to the court having jurisdiction with respect thereto and there has been a 
consequent failure of justice.  
19. Suits for compensation for wrongs to person or movables. —Where  a suit is for compensation for 
wrong done to the person or to movable property, if the wrong was done within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of one Court and the defendant resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, within 
the local limits of the jurisdiction of another Court, the suit may be institut ed at the option of the plaintiff in 
either of the said Courts.  
Illustrations  
 
(a) A, residing in Delhi, beats B in Calcutta. B may sue A either in Calcutta or in Delhi.  
(b) A, residing in Delhi, publishes in Calcutta statements defamatory of B. B may sue A either in Calcutta or in 
Delhi.  
20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause of action arises. —Subject  to 
the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction — 
(a) the def endant, or each of the defendants where there are more than one, at the time of the 
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally 
works for gain; or  
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than on e, at the time of the commencement of the 
suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1 951, s. 3 , for “the States” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  39 that in such  case either the leave of the Court is given, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry 
on busi ness, or personally works for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or  
(c) The cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.  
1*   *   *   *  * 
2[Explanation ].—A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office 
in 3[India] or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it has also a subordinate 
office, at such place. 
Illustrations  
(a)  A is a tradesman in Calcutta, B carries on business in Delhi. B, by his agent in Calcutta, buys goods of A and 
requests A to deliver them to the East Indian Railway Company. A delivers the goods accordingly in Calcutta. A 
may sue B for the price of the goods either in Calcutta, where the cause of action has arisen, or in Delhi, where B 
carries on business.  
(b)  A resi des at Simla, B at Calcutta and C at Delhi. A, B and C being together at Benaras, B and C make a joint 
promissory note payable on demand, and deliver it to A. A may sue B and C at Benaras, where the cause of action 
arose. He may also sue them at Calcutta, where B resides, or at Delhi, where C resides but in each of these cases, if 
the non -resident defendant objects , the suit cannot proceed without the leave of the Court.  
21. Objections to jurisdiction.  —4[(1)] No objection as to the place of suing shall be allowed by any 
Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest 
possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are settled at or before such settlement, and unless there 
has been a consequent failure of justice.  
5[(2) No objection as to the competence of a Court with reference to the pecuniary limits of its 
jurisdiction shall be allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the 
Court of first instance at the ea rliest possible opportunity, and, in all cases where issues are settled, at or 
before such settlement , and unless there has been a consequent failure of justice. 
(3) No objection as to the competence of the executing Court with reference to the local limit s of its 
jurisdiction shall be allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the 
executing Court at the earliest possible opportunity, and unless there has been a consequent failure of 
justice.]  
6[21A. Bar  on suit to set a side decree on objection as to place of suing. — No suit shall lie 
challenging the validity of a decree passed in a former suit between the same parties, or between the 
parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, on any gr ound based on an 
objection as to the place of suing. 
Explanation. —The expression “former suit ” means a suit which has been decided prior to the decision 
in the suit in which the validity of the decree is questioned, whether or not the previously decided su it was 
instituted prior to the suit in which the validity of such decree is questioned.]  
22. Power to transfer suits which may be instituted in more than one Court. —Where  a suit may 
be instituted in any one of two or more Courts and is instituted in one of  such Courts, any defendant, after 
notice to the other parties, may, at the earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are 
settled at or before such settlement, apply to have the suit transferred to another Court, and the Court to 
which su ch application is made, after considering the objections of the other parties (if any), shall 
determine in which of the several Courts having jurisdiction the suit shall proceed.  
                                                      
1. Explanation  1 omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 7 , ibid., for “ Explanation  II” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3 , for “the States”  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
4. S. 21 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Ins . by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  40 23. To what  Court application lies. —(I) Where the several Courts having juris diction are subordinate to 
the same Appellate Court, an application under section 22 shall be made to the Appellate Court.  
(2) Where such Courts are subordinate to different Appellate Courts but to the same High Court, the 
application shall be made to the said High Court.  
(3) Where such Courts are subordinate to different High Courts, the application shall be made to the 
High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Court in which the suit is brought is situate.  
24. General power of transfer and withdrawal. —(1) On the application of any of the parties and 
after notice to the parties and after hearing such of them as desired to be heard, or of its own motion 
without such notice, the High Court or the District Court may at any stage —  
 (a) trans fer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for trial or disposal to any 
Court subordinate to it and competent to try or dispose of the same, or  
(b) withdraw any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in any Court subordinate to it, and —  
(i) try or dispose of the same; or  
(ii) transfer the same for trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it and competent to 
try or dispose of the same; or  
(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the Court from which it was withdrawn.  
(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been transferred or withdrawn under sub -section (1), the Court 
which 1[is thereafter to try or dispose of such suit or proceeding] may, subject to any special directions in the 
case of an order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the point at which it was transferred or 
withdrawn.  
2[(3) For the purposes of this section, —  
(a) Courts of Additional and Assistant Judges shall be deemed to be subordinate to the 
District Court;  
(b) “proceeding ” includes a proceeding for the  execution of a decree or order.]  
(4) The Court trying any suit transferred or withdrawn under this section from a Court of Small Causes 
shall, for the purposes of such suit, be deemed to be a Court of Small Causes.  
3[(5) A suit or proceeding may be transf erred under this section from a Court which has no jurisdiction 
to try it.] 
4[25. Power of Supreme Court to transfer suits, etc .—(1) On the application of a party, and after notice 
to the parties , and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, the S upreme Court may, at any stage, if 
satisfied that an order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, direct that any suit, appeal or other 
proceeding be transferred from a High Court or other Civil Court in one State to a High Court or other  Civil 
Court in an y other State.  
(2) Every application under this section shall be made by a motion which shall be supported by an 
affidavit.  
(3) The Court to which such suit, appeal or other proceeding is transferred shall, subject to any special 
directio ns in the order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the stage at which it was transferred to it.  
(4) In dismissing any application under this section, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the 
application was frivolous or vexatious, orde r the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person 
who has opposed the application such sum, not exceeding two thousand rupees, as it considers 
appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
(5) The law applicable to any suit, appeal or other proce eding transferred under this section shall be 
the law which the Court in which the suit, appeal or other proceeding was originally instituted ought to 
have applied to such suit , appeal or proceeding.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 10, for “thereafter tries such suit” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Sub s. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).    
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for s. 25 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  41 INSTITUTION OF SUITS  
26. Institutio n of suits . — 1[(1)] Every suit shall be instituted by the presentation of a plaint or in such 
other manner as may be prescribed.  
 2[(2) In every plaint, facts shall be prove d by affidavit.]  
 *[Provided that such an affidavit shall be in the form and manner as prescribed unde r Order VI of 
Rule 15A.]  
SUMMONS AND DISCOVERY  
27. Summons to de fendants. —Where  a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issued to the 
defendant to appear and answer the claim and may be served in manner prescribed 3[on such day not 
beyond thirty days from date of the institution of the suit.]  
28. Service of summons where defendant resides in another State. —(1) A summons may be sent for 
service in another State to such Court and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that State.  
(2) The Court to which such summons is sent shall, upon receipt thereof, proceed as if it had been 
issued by such Court and shall then return the summons to the Court of issue together with the record       
(if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto.  
4[(3) Where the language of the summons sent for service in another State is different from the 
language of the record referred to in sub -section (2), a translation of the record, —  
(a) in Hindi, where the language of the Court issuing the summons is Hindi,  or 
(b) in Hindi or English where the language of such record is other than Hindi or English,  
shall also be sent together with the record sent under that sub -section.]  
5[29. Service of foreign summonses. —Summonses  and other processes issued by —  
(a) any Ci vil or Revenue Court established in any part of India to which the provisions of this 
Code do not extend, or  
(b) any Civil or Revenue Court established or continued by the authority of the Central 
Government outside India, or  
(c) any other Civil or Revenue  Court outside India to which the Central Government has, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declared the provisions of this section to apply,  
may be sent to the Courts in the territories to which this Code extends, and served as if they were 
summons es issued by such Courts.]  
30. Power to order discovery and the like. —Subject  to such conditions and limitations as may be 
prescribed, the Court may, at any time, either of its own motion or on the application of any party, —  
(a) make such orders as may be  necessary or reasonable in all matters relating to the delivery and 
answering of interrogatories, the admission of documents and facts, and the discovery, inspection, 
production, impounding and return of documents or other material objects producible as e vidence;  
(b) issue summonses to persons whose attendance is required either to give evidence or to 
produce documents or such other objects as aforesaid;  
(c) order any fact to be proved by affidavit.  
31. Summons to witness. —The provisions in sections 27, 28  and 29 shall apply to summonses to give  
evidence or to produce documents or other material objects.    
32. Penalty for default. —The Court may compel the attendance of any person to whom a summons 
has been issued under section 30 and for that purpose may —  
(a) issue a warrant for his arrest;  
(b) attach and sell his property;  
                                                      
1. S. 26 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 46 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1977).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 6, for s ection  29 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
* Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified val ue by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  42 (c) impose a fine  upon him 1[not exceeding five thousand rupees];  
(d) order him to furnish security for his appearance and in default commit him to the civil prison.  
JUDGMENT  AND DECREE  
33. Judgment and decree. —The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment, and on 
such judgment a decree shall follow.  
INTEREST  
34. Interest. — (1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of money, the Court may, in the decree,  
order interest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged, from the date of 
the suit to the date of the decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period prior to 
the institution of the suit,  2[with further interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent. per annum as the Court 
deems reasonable on such principal sum], from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date 
as the Court thinks fit:  
3[Provided that where the liability in relation to the sum so adjudged had arisen out of a commercial 
transaction, the rate of such further interest may exceed six per cent. per annum, but shall not exceed the 
contractual rate of interest or where there is no contractual rate, the rate at which moneys are lent or advanced 
by nationalised banks in relation to commercial transactions.  
Explanation I.—In this sub-section, “nationalised bank ” means a corresponding new bank as defined in 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Tr ansfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970).  
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section, a transaction is a commercial transaction, if it is 
connected with the industry, trade or business of the party incurring the liability.]  
(2) Where such a decr ee is silent with respect to the payment of further interest 4[on such principal sum] 
from the date of the decree to the date of payment or other earlier date, the Court shall be deemed to have 
refused such interest, and a separate suit therefor shall not lie. 
COSTS  
35. Costs. —(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the provisions of any 
law for the time being in force, the costs of an incident to all suits shall be in the discretion of the Court, and the 
Court shall have  full power to determine by whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are to be 
paid, and to give all necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid. The fact that the Court has no jurisdiction to 
try the suit shall be no bar to the exerc ise of such powers.  
(2) Where the Court directs that any costs shall not follow the event, the Court shall state its reasons in 
writing.  
5*   *   *   *   * 
*[35. Costs. — (1) In relation to any  Commercial dispute, the Court, notwithstanding anything contai ned 
in any other law for the time being in force or Rule, has the discretion to determine:  
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;  
(b) the quantum of those costs; and  
(c) when they are to be paid.   
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 4, for “not exceeding five hundred rupees”  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002). ` 
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 197 6, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 2, for “on such aggregate sum as aforesaid” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
5. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by Act 66 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified val ue by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).   43 Explanatio n.—For the purpose of clause ( a), the expression “costs” shall mean reasonable costs 
relating to — 
(i) the fees and expenses of the witnesses incurred;  
(ii) legal fees and expenses incurred;  
(iii) any other expenses incurred in connection with the proceedings.  
(2) If the Court decides to make an order for payment of costs, the general rule is that the unsuccessful 
party shall be ordered to pay the costs of the successful party:  
Provided that the Court may make an order deviating from the general rule for reasons to be recorded in 
writing.  
Illustration  
 The Plaintiff, in his suit, seeks a money decree for breach of contract, and damages. The Court holds that the 
Plaintiff is entitled to the money decree. However, it returns a finding that the claim for damages is frivolous and 
vexatious.  
In such circumstances the Court may impose costs on the Plaintiff, despite the Plaintiff being the successful 
party, for having raised frivolous claims for damages.  
(3) In making an order for the payment of costs, the Court shall have regard to the followin g circumstances, 
including — 
(a) the conduct of the parties;  
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that party has not been wholly successful;  
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counterclaim leading to delay in the disposal o f the case;  
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle is made by a party and unreasonably refused by the other party; 
and  
(e) whether the party had made a frivolous claim and instituted a vexatious proceeding wasting the time of 
the Court.  
(4) The orders  which the Court may make under this provision include an order that a party must pay ––  
(a) a proportion of another party’s costs;  
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs;  
(c) costs from or until a certain date;  
(d) costs incurred befor e proceedings have begun;  
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;  
(f) costs relating to a distinct part of the proceedings; and  
 (g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (U Ts).—  
    In Section 35, in sub -section (1) omit “Commercial”.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptati on of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].   
 44 1[35A. Co mpensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences. —(1) If in any suit 
or other proceedings 2[including an execution proceeding but 3[excludin g an appeal or a revision] any 
party objects to the claim or defence on the ground that the claim or defence or any part of it is, as against 
the objector, false or vexatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it ha s been put forward, and if 
thereafter,  as against the objector, such claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole 
or in part, the Court, 4[if it so thinks fit], may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or 
defence to be false or vexatious, make an order for the  payment to the object or by the party by whom 
such claim or defence has been put forward, of cost by way of compensation.  
*[(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount exceeding 5[three thousand 
rupees] or exceeding the limits of i ts pecuniary jurisdiction, whichever amount is less:  
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court exercising the jurisdiction of a 
Court of Small Causes under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887), 6[or under a 
corresponding law in force in 7[any part of India to which the said Act does not extend] and not being a Court 
constituted  8[under such Act or law], are less than two hundred and fifty rupees, the High Court may empower 
such Court to award as costs unde r this section any amount not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and not 
exceeding those limits by more than one hundred rupees :  
Provided, further, that the High Court may limit the amount which any Court or class of Courts is 
empowered to award as co sts under this section. ] 
 (3) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by reason thereof, be 
exempted from any criminal liability in respect of any claim or defence made by him.  
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded unde r this section in respect of a false or vexatious 
claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages or compensation in 
respect of such claim or defence.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) .—  
In Section 35A, o mit sub -section (2).  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notificati on No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020 )]. 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of section  35-A of Act V of 1908. —In the Code  of Civil  Procedure,  
1908  (hereinafter  in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act) in section 35 -A, after  
sub- section  (1), the following  sub-section  shall  be inserted , namely  :— 
“Revision .—(1-A) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall mutatis mutandis  apply  to an 
appeal where  the  appellate court  confirms  the  decision  of  the trial court  and the trial 
court  has not awarded,  or has awarded  insufficient,  compensatory  cost under  that sub-
section.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. Section  35A ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 2, which, under section 1(2) thereof may be brought into force in any State by the State 
Government on any specified date. It has been so brought int o force in Bombay, Bengal, U.P., Punjab, Bihar, C.P., Assam, 
Orissa and Madras.   
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 4, for “not being an appeal”  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1957) . 
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 14, for “excluding an appeal” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Ac t 66 of 1956, s. 4, for certain words  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1957) . 
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 14, for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 7.  
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “a Part B State”.  
8. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 7, for “under that Act”  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 45 Uttar Pradesh  
Section 35-A or Schedule of the Act .—(1) For the existing sub -section (1),  the following  
shall  be substituted  ; 
“(1) If in any suit or  other  proceeding,  including  proceedings  in execution,  but  not  being  
an appeal  or revision,  the court  finds  that the claim  or  defense  or  any  part thereof is false or 
vexatious to  the knowledge  of  the  party  by whom  it has been  put forward  and if such  claim  
or  defense  or  such  part is disallowed  abandoned  or withdrawn  in whole  or in part,  the court  
may,  after  recording  its reasons  for holding  such  claim  or defense  to be false  or  vexatious,  make  
an order  for the payment  to  the  successful  party  of  costs  by way of compensation irrespective 
of the decision  on other  issues  in the case.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XXIV of 1954, s. 3]  
1[35B. Costs for causing delay. —(1) If, on any date fixed for the hearing of a suit or for taking any 
step therein, a part y to the suit —  
(a) fails to take the step which he was required by or under this Code to take on that date, or 
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step or for producing evidence or on any other ground, 
the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, mak e an order requiring such party to pay to the other party 
such costs as would, in the opinion of the Court, be reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other party in 
respect of the expenses incurred by him in attending the Court on that date, and payment of  such costs, on 
the date next following the date of such order, shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution 
of—  
(a) the suit by the plaintiff, where the plaintiff was ordered to pay such costs,  
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the def endent was ordered to pay such costs.  
Explanation. —Where  separate defences have been raised by the defendant or groups of defendants, 
payment of such costs shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution of the defence by such 
defendants or group s of defendants as have been ordered by the Court to pay such costs.  
(2) The costs, ordered to be paid under sub -section (1), shall not, if paid, be included in the costs 
awarded in the decree passed in the suit; but, if such costs are not paid, a separate  order shall be drawn up 
indicating the amount of such costs and the names and addresses of the persons by whom such costs are 
payable and the order so drawn up shall be executable against such persons. ]  
PART II   
EXECUTION  
GENERAL  
2[36. Application to or ders. —The provisions of this Code relating to the execution of decrees 
(including provisions relating to payment under a decree) shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed 
to apply to the execution of orders (including payment under an order).]  
37. De finition of  Court which passed a decree. —The expression “Court which passed a decree, ” 
or words to that effect, shall, in relation to the execution of decrees , unless there is anything repugnant in 
the subject or context, be deemed to include, —  
 (a) where  the decree to be executed has been passed in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction, the 
Court of first instance, and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs.  by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 16, for s ection  36 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  46 (b) where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have jurisdiction to execute it,  the 
Court which, if the suit wherein the  decree was passed was instituted at the time of making the 
application for the execution of the decree, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.  
1[Explanation. —The Court of first instance does not cease to have jurisdiction to execute a decree 
merely on the ground that after the institution of the suit wherein the decree was passed or after the passing 
of the decree, any area has been transferred from the jurisdiction of that Court to the jurisdiction of any other 
Court ; but, in every such case, such othe r Court shall also have jurisdiction to execute the decree, if at the 
time of making the application for execution of the decree it would have jurisdiction to try the said suit.]  
COURTS  BY WHICH DECREES MAY BE EXECUTED  
38. Court by which decree may be exec uted. —A decree may be executed either by the Court which 
passed it, or by the Court to which it is sent for execution.  
39. Transfer of decree. —(1) The Court which passed a decree may, on the application of the decree -
holder, send it for execution to anothe r Court 2[of competent jurisdiction], —  
(a) if the person against whom the decree is passed actually and voluntarily resides or carries on 
business, or personally works for gain, within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such other Court, or  
(b) if such person has not property within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court which 
passed the decree sufficient to satisfy such decree and has property within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of such other Court, or  
 (c) if the decree directs th e sale or delivery of immovable property situate outside the local limits 
of the jurisdiction of the Court which passed it, or  
(d) if the Court which passed the decree considers for any other reason, which it shall record in 
writing, that the decree should  be executed by such other Court.  
(2) The Court which passed a decree may of its own motion send it for execution to any subordinate 
Court of competent jurisdiction.  
3[(3) For the purposes of this section, a Court shall be deemed to be a Court of competent  jurisdiction if, at 
the time of making the application for the transfer of decree to it, such Court would have jurisdiction to try the 
suit in which such decree was passed.] 
4[(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the Court which passed  a decree to execute 
such decree against any person or property outside the local limits of its jurisdiction.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 39  of Act  no.  5  of 1908 .— In section  39 of the Code  of Civil  
Procedure,  1908,  hereinafter  referred  to as  the said Code,  for sub-section  (3), the 
following  sub- section  shall  be substituted,  namely  :— 
“(3) For  the purposes  of this  section,  a Court shall be  deemed to  be a Court  of 
competent  jurisdiction  of the amount  or value  of the subject -matte r of the suit wherein  
the decree  was  passed  does  not  exceed  the pecuniary  limits,  if any, of  its  ordinary  
jurisdiction  at  the  time  of making  the application  for the transfer  of decree  to it, 
notwithstanding  that it had otherwise  no jurisdiction  to try the suit.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 31 of 1978, s. 2]  
40. Transfer of decree to Court in another State. —Where  a decree is sent for execution in another State, it 
shall be sent to such Court and executed in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in fo rce in that State.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 17  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. ( w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 18, (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  47 41. Result  of execution proceedings to be certified. —The Court to which a decree is sent for 
execution shall certify to the Court which passed it the fact of such execution, or where the former Court 
fails to execute the same the circums tances attending such failure.  
42. Powers of Court in executing transferred decree.  — 1[(1)] The  Court executing a decree sent to it shall 
have the same powers in executing such decree as if it had been passed by itself. All persons is  disobeying          
or obstructing the execution of the decree shall be punishable by such Court in the same manner as if it had  
passed the decree. And its order in executing such decree shall be subject to the same rules in respect of 
appeal as if the decree had passed by it self. 
2[(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section (1), the powers of the Court 
under that sub -section shall include the following powers of the Court which passed the decree, namely: —  
(a) power to send the decree for executi on to another Court under section 39;  
(b) power to execute the decree against the legal representative of the deceased judgment -debtor 
under section 50;  
(c) power to order attachment of a decree.  
(3) A Court passing an order in exercise of the powers speci fied in sub -section (2) shall send a copy 
thereof to the Court which passed the decree.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer on the Court to which a decree is sent for 
execution any of the following powers, namely: —  
(a) power to order exe cution at the instance of the transferee of the decree;  
(b) in the case of a decree passed against a firm, power to grant leave to execute such decree 
against any person, other than such a person as is referred to in clause (b), or clause (c) of              
sub-rule ( 1) of rule 50 of Order XXI. ]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution  of new section  for section 42 of  Act V of 1908. — For section  42 of the 
Code  of Civil  Procedure,  1908,  as  amended in  its  application to Uttar Pradesh (hereinafter 
referr ed to  as  the said Code)  the  following  section  shall  be  substituted  and  be deemed  
to have  been  substituted  with  affect  from  December  2, 1968,  namely  :— 
“42. Power of court in executing  transferred  decree. — (1) The Court executing a decree 
sent to it  shall have the  same  powers  in executing  such  decree  as if it had  been  passed by  
itself. All persons disobeying or obstructing the execution of the decree  shall be  punishable  by 
such  Court  in the  same  manner as  if it had passed  the decree,  and its order  in executing  such  
decree  shall  be subject to the same rules in respect of appeal as if the decree had been  passed  by itself.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub - section  (1), the powers  of  the  
Court  under  that  sub-section   shall  include  the following  powers  of the Court  which  passed  the  
decree,  namely  — 
(a) power  to send  the decree  for execution  to  another  Court  under  section  39 ; 
(b) power  to execute  the decree  against  the legal  representative  of the deceased  
judgment -debtor  under  section  50 ; 
(c) power to order attachment of a decree;  
(d) power  to decide  any question  relating  to the bar of limitation  to the 
executability  of the decree  ; 
(e) power  to record  payment  or adjustment  under  rule 2 of Order  XXI;  
                                                      
1. S. 42 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 19, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  48 (f) power  to order stay of execution under rule 29 of Order XXI;  
(g) in the case of a decree passed against a firm, power to grant leave to execute such decree 
against any person other than a person as is referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub -rule (1) of 
rule 5 0 of Order XXI.  
(3) A Court passing an order in exercise of the powers specified in  sub-section (2) 
shall send a copy thereof to the Court which passed the  decree.  
(4) Nothing in this  section shall be  deemed to confer on the  Court  to which a  decree  is  sent  for 
execution,  the power to order execution at  the instance  of the transferee  of a decree.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1970, s. 2]  
1[43. Execution of decrees passed by Civil Courts in places to which this Code does not extend. —
Any decree passed by any Civil Court established in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do 
not extend, or by any Court established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India, 
may, if it cannot be executed within the jurisdiction  of the Court by which it was passed, be executed in the 
manner herein provided within the jurisdiction of any Court in the territories to which this Code extends.] 
 2[44. Execution of decree s passed by Revenue Courts in places to which this Code does not 
extend. —The State Government may, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, declare that the decrees of 
any Revenue Court in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend, or any class of 
such decrees, may be executed in the State as if they had been passed by Courts in that State.] 
3[44A. Execution of decrees passed by Courts in reciprocating territory. —(1) Where a certified 
copy of a decree of any of the superior Courts of 4*** any reciprocating territory has been filed in a 
District  Court, the decree may be executed in 5[India] as if it had been passed by the District Court. 
(2) Together with the certified copy of the decree shall be filed a certificate from such superior Court 
stating the extent, if any, to which the decree has been  satisfied or adjusted and such certificate shall, for the 
purposes of proceedings under this section, be conclusive proof of the extent of such satisfaction or 
adjustment.  
(3) The provisions of section 47 shall as from the filing of the certified copy of the decree apply to the 
proceedings of a District Court executing a decree under this section, and the District Court shall refuse 
execution of any such decree, if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the decree falls within any 
of the excepti ons specified in clauses (a) to (f) of section 13.  
6[Explanation 1.— “Reciprocating  territory ” means any country or territory outside India which the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a reciprocating territory f or 
the purposes of this section; and “superior Courts ”, with reference to any such territory, means such 
Courts as may be specified in the said notification.  
Explanation 2.— “Decree ” with reference to a superior Court means any decree or judgment of such 
Court under which a sum of money is payable, not being a sum payable in respect of taxes or other 
charges of a like nature or in respect of a fine or other penalty, but shall in no case include an arbitration 
award, even if such an award is enforceable as a  decree or judgment.]]  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 8, for s ection  43 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) .  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 9, for s ection  44 (w.e. f. 1-4-1951).  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1937, s. 2.  
4. The words “the United Kingdom or” omitted by Act 71 of 1952, s. 2.  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
6. Subs. by Act 71 of 1952, s. 2, for Explanations  1 to 3.  49 1[45. Execution of decrees  outside India. —So much of the foregoing sections of this Part as 
empowers a Court to send a decree for execution to another Court shall be construed as empowering a 
Court in any State to send a decree for  execution to any Court established 2*** by the authority of the 
Central Government 3[outside India] to which the State Government has by notification in the Official 
Gazette declared this section to apply.]  
46. Precepts. —(1) Upon the application of the de cree-holder the Court which passed the decree may , 
whenever it thinks fit, issue a precept to any other Court which would be competent to execute such 
decree to attach any property belonging to the judgment -debtor and specified in the precept.  
(2) The Cour t to which a precept is sent shall proceed to attach the property in the manner prescribed 
in regard to the attachment of property in execution of a decree:  
Provided that no attachment under a precept shall continue for more than two months unless the 
period of attachment is extended by an order of the Court which passed the decree or unless before the 
determination of such attachment the decree has been transferred to the Court by which the attachment 
has been made and the decree -holder has applied for an order for the sale of such property.  
QUESTIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY COURT EXECUTING DECREE  
47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing decree. —(1) All questions arising between 
the parties to the suit in which the decree was passed, or their repre sentatives, and relating to the 
execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree, shall be determined by the Court executing the decree 
and not by a separate suit.  
 
4*       *   *   *   * 
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the representative of a party, such 
question shall, for the purposes of this section, be determined by the Court.  
5[Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit  has been dismissed and a 
defendant against whom a suit has been dism issed are parties to the suit.  
Explanation II.—(a) For the purposes of this section, a purchaser of property at a sale in execution of a 
decree shall be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and  
(b) all questions relating to the d elivery of possession of such property to such purchaser or his 
representative shall be deemed to be questions relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree 
within the meaning of this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of section  47.— In section 47 of the principal Act, Explanation II 
inserted by  the U. P. Civil  Laws  (Reforms  and Amendment)  Act, 1954,  shall  be omitted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 3]  
 
LIMIT OF TIME FOR EXECUTION  
48. [Execution barred in certain cases. ] Rep. by the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), s. 28  (w.e.f.  1-1-1964).  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  the A.O. 1937, for s ection  45. 
2. The words “or continued” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “in any Indian State”.    
4. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 20, ibid. for the Explanati on (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  50 STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new  section 48 A. - After section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908), 
in its application thereof  to the S tate of Rajasthan, the following new section shall be, and be deemed always to 
have been inserted, namely: -- 
"48-A- Varied application of section 48. - For the purposes of the application of section 48 to the 
State of Rajasthan; - 
(i) a decree, made before t he twenty -fifth day of January, 1950, in those parts of Rajasthan 
where a corresponding provision did not then exist, shall, unless it shall have becomr time -barred 
or otherwise infructuous before the said day in accordance with any law then prevailing in those 
parts, be deemed to have been made on the said day, and  
(ii) Where a decree might have been made before the twenty -fifth day of January, 1950 in 
those parts of Rajasthan where a corresponding provision then existed, with a period longer than 
twelve y ears provided therein such longer period or the period of twelve years form the said day 
whichever expires first shall be the period after which, according to section 48, no order for 
execution shall be made".  
[Vide Rajasthan Act XX of 1952, s. 2]  
TRANSFER EES AND LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES  
49. Transferee. —Every  transferee of a decree shall hold the same subject to the equities (if any) which the 
judgment -debtor might have enforced against the original decree -holder.  
50. Legal representative. —(1) Where a judgment -debtor dies before the decree has been fully satisfied, the 
holder of the decree may apply to the Court which passed it to execute the same against the legal representative of 
the deceased.  
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal representativ e, he shall be liable only to the extent of the 
property of the deceased which has come to his hands and has not been duly disposed of; and, for the purpose of 
ascertaining such liability, the Court executing the decree may, of its own motion or on the  application of the 
decree -holder, compel such legal representative to produce such accounts as it thinks fit.  
PROCEDURE IN EXECUTION  
51. Powers of Court to enforce execution. —Subject  to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, 
the Court may, on t he application of the decree -holder, order execution of the decree —  
(a) by delivery of any property specifically decreed;  
(b) by attachment and sale or by the sale without attachment of any property;  
(c) by arrest and detention in prison 1[for such period  not exceeding the period specified in section 58, 
where arrest and detention is permissible under that section] ; 
(d) by appointing a receiver; or  
(e) in such other manner as the nature of the relief granted may require:  
2[Provided that, where the decree i s for the payment of money, execution by detention in prison shall not be 
ordered unless, after giving the judgment -debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be committed 
to prison, the Court, for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied —  
(a) that the judgment -debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or delaying the execution of the 
decree, —  
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or 
(ii) has, after the institution of the suit in which t he decree was passed, dishonestly transferred, 
concealed, or removed any part of his property, or committed any other act of bad faith in relation to 
his property, or 
(b) that the judgment -debtor has, or has had since the date of the decree , the means to p ay the amount 
of the decree or some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or neglected to pay the 
same, or  
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment -debtor was bound in a fiduciary capacity to 
account.  
Explanation. —In the calculation of the means of the judgment -debtor for the purposes of clause (b), there 
shall be left out of account any property which, by or under any law or custom having the force of law for the 
time being in force, is exempt from attachment in ex ecution of the decree.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by  Act 104 of 1976, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 1936, s. 2.  51 52. Enfor cement of decree against legal representative. —(1) Where a decree is passed against a party 
as the legal representative of a deceased person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property 
of the deceased, i t may be executed by the attachment and sale of any such property.  
(2) Where no such property remains in the possession of the judgment -debtor and he fails to satisfy the Court 
that he has duly applied such property of the deceased as is proved to have com e into his possession, the decree 
may be executed against the judgment -debtor to the extent of the property in respect of which he has failed so to 
satisfy the Court in the same manner as if the decree had been against him personally.  
53. Liability of ance stral property. —For the purposes of section 50 and section 52, property in the hands 
of a son or other descendant which is liable under Hindu law for the payment of the debt of a deceased 
ancestor, in respect of which a decree has been passed, shall be dee med to be property of the deceased which 
has come to the hands of the son or other descendant as his legal representative.  
54. Partition of estate or separation of share. —Where  the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate 
assessed to the payment of revenue to the Government, or for the separate possession of a share of such an estate, 
the partition of the estate or the separation of the share shall be made by the Collector or any gazetted subordinate 
of the Collector  deputed by him in this behalf , in accordance with the law (if any) for the time being in force 
relating to the partition , or the separate possession of shares, of such estates.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka. — 
For Section 54, the following Section shall be substituted, namely. — 
“54. Partit ion of estate or separation of share. —Where the decree is for the partition of an 
undivided estate assessed to the payment of revenue to the Government , or for the separate possession of 
a share of such an estate, the partition of the estate or the separat ion of the share of such an estate shall be 
made by the Court in accordance with the law if any , for the time being in force relating to the partition or 
the separate possession of shares , and if necessary on the report of a revenue officer, not below the rank 
of Tahsildar or such other person as the Court may appoint as Commissioner in that behalf. ” 
[Vide Karnataka Act 36 of 1998, sec. 2.]  
ARREST AND DETENTION  
55. Arrest and detention. —(1) A judgment -debtor may be arrested in execution of a decree at any 
hour and on any day, and shall, as soon as practicable, be brought before the  Court, and his detention may 
be in the civil prison of the district in which the Court ordering the detention is situate, or, where such 
civil prison does not afford suitable acco mmodation, in any other place which the State Government may 
appoint for the detention of persons ordered by the Courts of such district to be detained : 
Provided, firstly , that, for the purpose of making an arrest under this section, no dwelling -house shal l be 
entered after sunset and before sunrise:  
Provided, secondly, that no outer door of a dwelling -house shall be broken open unless such dwelling -
house is in the occupancy of the judgment -debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but 
when the officer authori zed to make the arrest has duly gained access to any dwelling -house,  he may break 
open the door of any room in which he has reason to believe the judgment -debtor is to be found : 
Provided, thirdly , that, if the room is in the actual oc cupancy of a woman who is not the judgment -debtor and who 
according to the customs of the country does not appear in public, the officer authori zed to make the arrest shall give 
notice to her that she is at liberty to withdraw, and, after allowing a reason able time for her to withdraw and giving her 
reasonable facility for withdrawing, may enter the room for the purpose of making the arrest : 
Provided , fourthly, that, where the decree in execution of which a judgment -debtor is arrested, is a decree for 
the p ayment of money and the judgment -debtor pays the amount of the decree and the costs of the arrest to the 
officer arresting him, such officer shall at once release him.  
(2) The State Gover nment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any person or class of persons 
whose arrest might be attended with danger or inconvenience to the public shall not be liable to arrest in execution of a 
decree othe rwise than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the State Government in thi s behalf.  
(3) Where a judgment -debtor is arrested in execution of a decree for the payment of money and brought before the 
Court, the Court shall inform him that he may apply to be declared an insolvent, and that he 1[may be discharged] if he 
has not commi tted any act of bad faith regarding the subject of the application and if he complies with the provisions of 
the law of insolvency for the time being in force.  
(4) Where a judgment -debtor expresses his intention to apply to be declared an insolvent and fur nishes security, to 
the satisfaction of the Court, that he will within one month so apply, and that he will appear, when called upon, in any 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1921, s. 2 , for “will be discharged”.  52 proceedin g upon the application or upon the decree in execution of which he was arrested, the Court 1[may release] him 
from arrest, and, if he fails so to apply and to appear, the Court may either direct the security to be reali zed or commit 
him to the civil prison in execution of the decree.  
56. Prohibition of arrest or detention of women in execution of decree for mo ney.—Notwithstanding  anything  in 
this Part, the Court shall not order the arrest or detention in the civil prison of a woman in execution of a decree for the 
payment of money.  
57. Subsistence -allowance. —The State Government may fix scales, graduated accord ing to rank, race and 
nationality, of monthly allowances payable for the subsistence of judgment -debtors.  
58. Detention and release. —(1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of a decree shall be so 
detained, —  
(a) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding 2[ 3[five thousand rupees], for a 
period not exceeding three months, and,]  
4[(b) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding two thousand rupees, but not 
exceeding five thousand rupees, for a peri od not exceeding six weeks.]  
5[(1A) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no order for detention of the judgment -debtor 
in civil prison in execution of a decree for the payment of money shall be made, where the total amount of the 
decree do es not exceed 6[two thousand rupees.] ] 
(2) A judgment -debtor released from detention under this section shall not merely by reason of his release be 
discharged from his debt, but he shall not be liable to be re -arrested under the decree in execution of whi ch he was 
detained in the civil prison.  
59. Release on ground of illness. —(1) At any time after a warrant for the arrest of a judgment -debtor has been 
issued the Court may cancel it on the ground of his serious illness.  
(2) Where a judgment -debtor has been  arrested, the Court may release him if, in its opinion, he is not in a fit 
state of health to be detained in the civil prison.  
(3) Where a judgment -debtor has been committed to the civil prison, he may be released therefrom —  
(a) by the State Government, on the ground of the existence of any infectious or contagious disease, or  
(b) by the committing Court, or any Court to which that Court is subordinate, on the ground of his suffering 
from any serious illness.  
(4) A judgment -debtor released under this sect ion may be re -arrested, but the period of his detention in civil 
prison shall not in the aggregate exceed that prescribed by section 58 . 
ATTACHMENT  
760. Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of decree .—(1) The following property is liable to 
attachment and sale in execution of a decree, namely, lands, houses or other buildings, goods, money, bank -notes , 
cheques , bills of exchange, hundis, promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities for money , 
debts, shares in a corporat ion and,  save as hereinafter  mentioned, all other saleable property, movable or 
immovable, belonging to the judgment -debtor, or over which, or the profits of which, he has a disposing 
power which he may exercise for his own benefit, whether the same be hel d in the name of the judgment -
debtor or by another person in trust for him or on his behalf:  
Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale, namely: —  
(a) the necessary wearing -apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedd ing of the judgment -debtor, his 
wife and children, and such personal ornaments as, in accordance with religious usage, cannot be 
parted with by any woman;  
(b) tools of artisans, and, where the judgment -debtor is an agriculturist, his implements of 
husbandr y and such cattle and seed -grain as may, in the opinion of the Court, be necessary to enable 
him to earn his livelihood as such , and such portion of agricultural produce or of any class of 
agricultural produce as may have been declared to be free from liab ility under the provisions of the 
next following section ; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 3 of 1921,  s. 2, for “shall release”.  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 22 , for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 5, “one thousand rupees”  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., by clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s.  5, for “five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
7. For amendments to s. 60, in its application to East Punjab, see the Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1934 (Pun. Act 7 of 
1934), s. 35, as amended by Pun. Acts 12 of 1940 and 6 of 1942.   53 (c) houses  and other buildings (with the materials and the sites thereof and the land immediately  
appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to 1[an agriculturist or a labourer  of 
a domestic servant] and occupied by him ;  
 (d) books of account ;  
 (e) a mere right to sue for damages ;  
 (f) any right of personal service  ; 
 (g) stipends and gratuities allowed to pensioners of the Government 2[or of a local authority or of 
any other  employer], or payable out of any service family pension fund 3notified in the Official 
Gazette by 4[the Central Government or the State Government] in this behalf, and political pensions;  
5[(h) the wages of labourers and domestic servants, whether payable  in money or in kind;  
6***] 
7[(i) salary  to the extent of 8[the first 9[ 10[one thousand rupees] ] and two third of the remainder] 11[in 
execution of any decree other than a  decree for  maintenance]:  
12[Provided that where any part of such portion of the salary  as is liable to attachment has been under 
attachment, whether continuously or intermittently, for a total period of twenty -four months, such portion 
shall be exempt from attachment until the expiry of a further period of twelve months, and, where such 
attachment has been made in execution of one and the same decree , shall, after the  attachment has 
continued for a total period of twenty -four months, be finally exempt from attachment in execution of that 
deeree .]] 
11[(ia) one-third  of the salary in execution  of any decree for maintenance;]  
13[(j) the pay and allo wances of persons to whom the Air Force Act , 1950 (45 of 1950) or the Ar my 
Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957),  applies;]  
(k) all compulsory depo sits and other  sums  in or derive d from  any fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 
14[1925], (19 of 19 25), for the time being applies in so far as they are declared by the  said Act not to be liable to 
attachment ;  
15[(ka) all deposits and other sums in or derived from any fund to which the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968    
(23 of 1968), for the time being a pplies, in so far as they are dec lared by the said Act as not to be liable to atta chment;  
(kb) all moneys payable under a policy of insurance on the life of the judgment -debtor;  
(kc) the interest of a les see of a residential  of building  to which the provisions of law for the  time 
being in force  relating to control of rents and ac commodation apply;]  
16[(1) any allowance forming part of the emoluments of any 17[servant o f the 18[Government] ] or of any 
servant of a railway company or local authority  which the 19[appropriate G overnment] may by notification in 
the Official Gazette declare to be exempt from attachment , and any subsistence grant or allowance made to 
20[any such servant] while under sus pension;]  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Ac t 104 of 1976, s. 23, for “an agriculturist” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977)  
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. For such a notification, see Gazette of India, 1909, Pt . I, p. 5.  
4. Subs.  by the A.O. 1937, for “the G.G. in C.”  
5. Subs. by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, for cl auses (h) and ( i). The amendments made by that section have no effect in respect of any 
proceedings arising out of a suit instituted before 1st June, 1937, see ibid., section  3. 
6. The words “and salary, to the extent of the first hundred rupees and one-half the remainder of such salary” omitted by Act 5 of 
1943,  s. 2.  
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( i) and  the proviso.  
8. Subs. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 2, for “the first hundred rupees”.  
9. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for “two hundred rupees a nd one -half the remainder” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
10. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 6, for “four hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
11. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 6  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
12. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for “the proviso” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
13. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
14. Subs. by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, for “1897”.  
15. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
16. Subs. by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, for the original clause ( l), see also footnote 3.  
17. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2, for “public officer”.  
18. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for “crown”.  
19. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “G.G. in C”.  
20. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2,  for “any such officer or servant”.  54 (m) an expectancy  of succession by survivorship or other merely contingent or possible right or interest;  
(n) a right to future m aintenance;  
(o) any  allowance  declared b y 1[any India n law] to be exempt from liability to attach ment or sale in execution 
of a decree ; and  
(p) where the judgment -debtor is a person liable f or the payment of land -revenue ; any movable property 
which , under any law for the  time being applicable to hi m, is exempt from  .sale for the recove ry of an arrear of 
such revenue.  
2[Explanation   I. —The moneys payable in relation to the matters mentioned in clauses (g), ( h), (i), (ia), (j), (l) 
and ( o) are exempt from attachment or sale, whether before or after they are actually payable, and, in the case of 
salary, the attach able portion thereof is liable to attachment , whether before or after it is actually payable.] 
3[ 4[Explanation II. —In clauses (i) and (ia)], “salary ” means the total monthly emoluments, excluding any 
allowance declared exempt from attachment under the provisio ns of clause ( 1), derived by a person from his 
employment whether on duty or on leave.]  
5[Explanation  6[III]—In clause ( 1) “appropriate Government ” means —  
(i) as respects any 7[person] in the service of the Central Government, or any servant of 8[a Railwa y 
Administration] or of a cantonment authority or of the port authority of a major port , the Central Government;  
9*   *   *   *   * 
(iii) as respects any other 10[servant of the 11[Government] ] or a servant of any other 12*** local authority, the State 
Govern ment.]  
13[Explanation IV—For the purposes of this proviso, “wages ” includes bonus, and “labourer ” includes a skilled  unskilled or 
semi -skilled labourer. 
Explanation V—For the purposes of this proviso, the expression “agriculturist ” means a person who cultiv ates land 
personally and who depends for his livelihood mainly on the income from agricultural land, whether as owner, tenant, partner or 
agricultural labourer.  
Explanation VI—For the purposes of Explanation V an agriculturist shall be d eemed to cultivate land personally, if he 
cultivates land —  
(a) by his own labour, or  
(b) by the labour of any member of his family, or  
(c) by servants or labourers on wages payable in cash or in kind (not being as a share of the produce), or 
both.] 
13[(IA) Notwithstanding a nything contained in any other  law for the time being in force, an agreement by which a person 
agrees to waive the benefit of any exemption under this section shall be void.] 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed 14*** to exempt houses and other build ings (with the materials and the 
sites thereof and the lands immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) from attachment or sale in 
execution of decrees for rent of any such house, building, site or land 15*** 
16*   *   *   *   * 
STATE  AMENDMENTS  
Kerala. — 
In clause ( g) of the Proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 60, after the words “stipends and gratuities allowed 
by pensioners of the Government ” the words “or of a local authority ” shall be inserted . 
[Vide Kerala Act 13 of 1957, s. 3]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “any law passed under the I ndian Councils Act 1861 and 1892”.  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23 , for Explanation I (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
3. Added  by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, The amendments made by that section  shall not  effect in respect of any proceeding arising out of  any 
suit institute d before 1st June, 1937, see ibid., section  3.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, “ Explanation  2. —in clauses ( h) and ( i)” (w.e.f. 1 -2- 1977).  
5. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for  figure  “3” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by Act  5 of 19 43, s. 2, for “Public officer”.  
8. Subs. by the  A.O. 1950, for “a Federal Railway”.  
9. Clause ( ii) omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
10. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2, for “public officer”.  
11.  Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for “crown”.  
12. The words “railway o r” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
13. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 2 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
14. The brackets and letter “( a)”, rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
15. The word “or” rep. by, s. 3, ibid., and the Second Schedule.  
16. Clause ( b) rep. by, s. 3 ibid., and the Second Schedule.  55 In the proviso  to sub section ( 1) of section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 
of 1908), after clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:  — 
“(gg) all moneys payable to the beneficiaries under the Family Benefit Scheme for the employees 
of the Government of Kerala. ” 
[Vide Kerala Act 1 of 1988, s. 2.]   
Himachal Pradesh. — 
Amendment in section 60.  — (1) In Section 60 sub -section ( 1): 
(i) at the end of clause ( c), add the following:  
or compensation paid for such houses and buildings (including compensation for the materials and 
the sites and the land referred to above) acquired for a public purpose;  
(ii) after clause ( c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:  — 
(cc) compensation paid for agricultural lands belongin g to agriculturists and acquired for a public 
purpose;  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1956, sec. 2.]  
Tamil Nadu  
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908 .—In clause (g) of the proviso to sub -section (1) of 
section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908, after the words “stipends and gratuities allowed to 
pensioners of the Government”, the words “or of a authority” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act XXXIV of 1950, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908. -In clause (b) of th e proviso to sub -section (1) of 
section 60 of the code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) in its application to the State of 
Rajasthan, after the word, “agriculturist” the words “his milch cattle and those likely to calve within two 
years” sh all be inserted . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 1 9 of 195 8, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908. - In the proviso to sub -section (1) of section 60 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) in the application thereof to the State of 
Rajasthan, - 
(i) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: - 
(kk) moneys payable under Life Insurance Certificates issued in pursuance of the Rajasthan 
Government Servants Insu rance Rules, 1953;" and  
(ii) after explanation 3 the foll owing explanation shall be inserted, namely: - 
''Explanation 4. -Where any money payable to a Government servant of the State is exempt from 
attachment under the provision contained in clause (kk), such money shall remain exempt from attachment 
notwithstandi ng the fact that owing to the death of a Government servant it is payable to some other person."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 16 of 1957, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Addition of explanation (1 -A) to sub -section (1) of section 60. — After Explanation (1) of sub -section (1) o f 
section 60 of the  Code  of Civil  Procedure,  1908,  insert  the following  Explanation  (I-A) ; 
“Explanation (I -A) — Particulars mentioned in clause (c) are exempt from sale in execution of a 
decree  whether  passed  before  or after the commencement of the Co de of  Civil  Procedure  (United 
Provinces Amendment) Act, 1908, for enforcement of a mortgage or charge thereon” . 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XXXV of 1948, s. 2]  
61. Partial exemption of agricultural produce. —The State Government 1*** may, by general or speci al order 
published in the Official Gazette, declare that such portion of agricultural produce, or of any class of agricultural 
produce, as may appear to the State Government to be necessary for the purpose of providing until the 
next harvest for the due cu ltivation of the land and for the support of the judgment -debtor and his family, shall, in 
the case of all agriculturists or of any class of agriculturists, be exempted from liability to attachment or sale in 
execution of a decree.  
                                                      
1. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C.” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Sch edule  Pt 1.  56 62. Seizure  of property in dwelling -house. —(1) No person executing any process under this Code directing or 
authorizing seizure of movable property shall enter any dwelling -house after sunset and before sunrise.  
(2) No outer door of a dwelling -house shall be broken open unless su ch dwelling -house is in the occupancy of 
the judgment -debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but  when  the person executing any such 
process has duly gained access to any dwelling -house, he may break open the door of any room in which he has 
reason to believe any such property to be.  
(3) Where a room in a dwelling -house is in the actual occupancy of a woman who, according to the customs of the 
country, does not appear in public, the person executing the process shall give notice to such  woman that she is at liberty 
to withdraw; and, after allowing reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for withdrawing, he 
may enter such room for the purpose of seizing the property, using at the same time every precaution, consistent with these 
provisions, to prevent its clandestine removal.  
63. Property attached in execution of decrees of several Courts. —(1) Where property not in the custody of any 
Court is under attachment in execution of decrees of more Courts than one, t he Court which shall receive or realize such 
property and shall determine any claim thereto and any objection to the   attachment thereof shall be the Court of highest 
grade, or, where there is no difference in grade between such Courts, the Court under wh ose decree the property was first 
attached.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to invalidate any proceeding taken by a Court executing one of such 
decrees.  
1[Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -section (2), “proceeding taken by a Court ” does not include an  order 
allowing, to a decree -holder who has purchased property at a sale held in execution of a decree, set off to the extent 
of the purchase price paya ble by him.]  
64. Private alienation of property after attachment to be void.  —2[(1)] Where an attachment has been made, 
any private transfer or delivery of the property attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the judgment -
debtor of any debt, dividend or other mon ies contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all claims 
enforceable under the attachment.  
3[(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any private transfer or delivery of the property attached or of any 
interest therein, made in pursuance of any contract for such transfer or delivery entered into and registered be fore the 
attachment.]  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section, claims enforceable under an attachment include claims for the rateable 
distribution of assets.  
SA L E  
65. Purchaser ’s title. —Where  immovable property is sold in execution of a decree and suc h sale has become absolute, the 
property shall be deemed to have vested in the purchaser from the time when the property is sold and not from the time when t he 
sale becomes absolute.   
66. [Suit purchase being on behalf of plaintiff. ]— Rep. by Act , 1988 (45  of 1988), s. 7 (w.e.f.  19-5-1988).  
67. Power for State Government to make rules as to sales of land in execution of decrees for payment of money.  — 4[(1)] The State 
Government 5*** may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for any local ar ea imposing conditions in respect of the sale of any class of 
interests in land in execution of decrees for the payment  of money, where such interest are so uncertain or undetermined as, in the opinion of the State 
Government, to make it impossible to fix their value.  
6[(2) When on the date on which this Code came into operation in any local area, any special rules as to  sale of and in 
execution of decrees were in force therein, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette declare such rules to 
be in force, or may 5*** by a like notification, modify the same.  
Every notification issued in the exercise of the powers conferred by this sub -section shall set out the rules so 
continued or modified.]  
7[(3) Every rule made under this section sha ll be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State  
Legislature.]  
  
                                                      
1. Explanation   ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Section  64 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 22 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Ins. by , Act 22 of 2002 , s. 3, (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Section  67 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 1  of 1914, s. 3.  
5. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C.” omitted by Ac t 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the Schedule , Pt. 1.    
6. Added by Act 1 of 1914, s. 3.  
7. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  57 DELEGATION TO COLLECTOR OF POWER TO EXECUTE DECREES  
AGAINST IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
68. [Power to prescribe rules for transferring to collector execution of certain decrees .]— Rep.  by the Code 
of Civil Procedure  (Amendment) Act, 1956 (66 of 1956), s. 7  (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
69. [Provisions of Third Schedule to apply. ]— Rep. by s.  7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
70. [Rules of Procedure. ]—  Rep. by s.  7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
71. [Jurisdict ion of Civil Courts barred. ]— Rep. by s.  7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
72. [Collector to deemed to be acting judicially. ]— Rep. by s. 7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS  
73. Proceeds of execution -sale to be rateably distributed among decree -hold ers.—(1) Where assets are held 
by a Court and more persons than one have, before the receipt of such assets, made application to the Court for the 
execution of decrees for the payment of money passed against the same judgment -debtor and have not obtained 
satisfaction thereof, the assets, after deducting the costs of realization, shall be rateably distributed among all such 
persons:  
Provided as follows: —  
(a) where any property is sold subject to a mortgage or charge, the mortgage or incumbrancer shall not b e 
entitled to share in any surplus arising from such sale;  
(b) where any property liable to be sold in execution of a decree is subject to a mortgage or charge, the Court 
may, with the consent of the mortgagee or incumbrancer, order that the property be so ld free from the mortgage 
or charge, giving to the mortgagee or incumbrancer the same interest in the proceeds of the sale as he had in the 
property sold;  
(c) where any immovable property is sold in execution of a decree ordering its sale for the discharge  of an 
incumbrance thereon, the proceeds of sale shall be applied —  
First, in defraying the expenses of the sale;  
Secondly , in discharging the amount due under the decree;  
Thirdly, in di scharging the interest and principal monies due on subsequent incumbra nces                           
(if any); and        
Fourthly, rateably among the holders of decrees for the payment of money against the judgment -debtor, 
who have, prior to the sale of the property, applied to the Court which passed the decree ordering such  sale 
for execution of such decrees, and have no obtained satisfaction thereof.  
(2) Where all or any of the assets liable to be rateably distributed under this section are paid to a person 
not entitled to receive the same, any person so entitled may sue su ch person to compel him to refund the assets.  
(3) Nothing in this section affects any right of the Government.  
RESISTANCE TO EXECUTION  
74. Resistance to execution. — Where the Court is satisfied that the holder of a decree for the possession of 
immovable p roperty or that the purchaser of immovable property sold in execution of a decree has been resisted or 
obstructed in obtaining possession of the property by the judgment -debtor or some person on his behalf and that 
such resistance or obstruction was withou t any just cause, the Court may, at the instance of the decree -holder or 
purchaser, order the judgment -debtor or such other person to be detained in the civil prison for a term which may 
extend to thirty days and may further direct that the decree -holder o r purchaser be put into possession of the 
property.  
PART III  
INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
COMMISSIONS  
75. Power of Court to issue commissions. —Subject  to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed , 
the Court may issue a commission —  
(a) to examine any person;  
(b) to make a local investigation;  
(c) to examine or adjust accounts; or  
(d) to make a partition;  
1[(e) to hold a scientific, technical, or expert investigation;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  58  (f) to cond uct sale of property which is subject to speedy and natural decay and whic h is in the 
custody of the Court pending the determination of the suit;  
 (g) to perform any ministerial  act.] 
76. Commission to another Court. —(1) A commission for the examination of any person may be 
issued to any Court (not being a High Court) situate in  a State other than the State in which the Court of 
issue is situate and having jurisdiction in the place in which the person to be examined resides.  
(2) Every Court receiving a commission for the examination of any person under sub -section ( 1) shall 
exami ne him or cause him to be examined pursuant thereto, and the commission, when it has been duly 
executed, shall be returned together with the evidence taken under it to the Court from which it was 
issued, unless the order for issuing the commission has othe rwise directed, in which case the commission 
shall be returned in terms of such order.  
77. Letter of request. —In lieu of issuing a commission the Court may issue a letter of request to 
examine a witness residing at any place not within 1[India .] 
2[78. Comm issions issued by foreign Courts. —Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be 
prescribed the provisions as to the execution and return of commissions for the examination of witnesses 
shall apply to commissions issued by or at the instance of —  
(a) Courts situate in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend; or  
(b) Courts established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India; or  
(c) Courts of any State or country outside India.]  
PART IV  
SUITS I N PARTICULAR CASES  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OR PUBLIC OFFICERS IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY  
3[79. Suits by or against Government. —In a suit by or against the Government, the authority to be 
named as plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, shall  be—  
(a)  in the case of a suit by or against the Central Government, 4[the Union of India], and  
(b) in the case of a suit by or against a State Government, the State.]  
80. Notice. — 5[(1)] 6[ Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), no suits 7[shall  be instituted] 
against the Government (including the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir)] or against a 
public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity, 
until the expiration of two months  next after notice in writing has been 8[delivered to, or left at the office 
of—] 
(a) in the case of a suit against the Central Government, 9[except where it relates to a railway] a 
Secretary to that Government;  
10[(b)] in the case of a suit against the C entral Government where it relates to railway, the General 
Manager of that railway;  
11[(bb) in the case of a suit against the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Chief  
Secretary to that Government or any other officer authori zed by that Govern ment in this behalf;]  
(c) in the case of a suit against 12[any other State Government], a Secretary to that Government or 
the Collector of the district;  13*** 
 14*          *               *            *       * 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”.  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 11, for section 78 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
3. Subs by the A.O. 1948, for section 79.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Dominion of India”.  
5. S. 80 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “No suit shall be instituted” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 3, for “ shall be instituted against the Government ” (w.e.f. 5 -6-1964). The words in italics were 
subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “Instituted against the Crown”   
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “in the case of the Secretary of State in Council, delivered to, or left at the office of a Se cretary to 
the L.G. or the Collector of the District”.  
9. Ins. by Act 6 of 1948, s. 2.  
10. Clause ( aa) ins. by Act 6 of 1948, s. 2 and relattered as clause ( b) and the Former clause ( b) omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
11. Ins. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5 -6-1964).  
12. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “a State Government” (w.e.f. 5 -6-1964).  
13. The word “and” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
14. C lause ( d) omitted ibid.  59 and, in  the case of a public officer, delivered  to him or left at his office, stating the cause of   action,  the 
name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims; and the plaint 
shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left.  
1[(2) A suit  to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against the Government (including the 
Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir) or any public officer in respect of any act purporting to 
be done by such public officer in his official capacity, may be institute d, with the leave of the Court, 
without serving any notice as required by sub -section ( 1); but the Court shall not grant relief in the suit, 
whether interim or otherwise, except after giving to the Government or public officer, as the case may be, 
a reason able opportunity of showing cause in respect of the relief prayed for in the suit : 
Provided that the Court shall, if it is satisfied, after hearing the parties, that no urgent or immediate 
relief need be granted in the suit, return the plaint for presentat ion to it after complying with the 
requirements of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) No suit instituted against the Government or against a public officer in respect of an y act 
purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity shall be dismissed mer ely by reason 
of any error or defect in the notice referred to in sub -section ( 1), if in such notice —  
(a) the name, description and the residence of the plaintiff had been so given as to enable the 
appropriate authority or the public officer to identify t he person serving the notice and such notice 
had been delivered or left at the office of the appropriate authority specified in sub -section ( 1), and  
(b) the cause of action and the relief claimed by the plaintiff had been substantially indicate d.] 
81. Exem ption from a rrest and personal appearance. —In a suit instituted against a public officer 
in respect of any act purporting to be done b y him in his official capacity —  
(a) the defendant shall not be liable to arrest nor his property to attachment otherwise than in 
execution of a decree, and,  
(b) where the Court is satisfied that the defendant cannot absent himself from his duty without 
detriment to the public service, it shall exempt him from appea ring in person.  
82. Execution of decree. —2[(1) Where, in a su it by or against the Government or by or against a 
public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by him in his official capacity , a decree is passed 
against the Union of India or a State or, as the case may be, the public officer , such decree shall not be 
executed except in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2).] 
(2) Execution shall not be issued on any such decree unless it remains unsatisfied for the period of 
three months computed from the date of 3[such decree].  
4[(3) The provis ions of sub -sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to an order or award as they 
apply in relation to a decree, if the order or award —  
(a) is passed or made against 5[the Union of India] or a State or a public officer in respect of any 
such act as af oresaid, whether by a Court or by any other authority; and  
(b) is capable of being executed under the provisions of this Code or of any other law for the time 
being in force as if it were a decree.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 28, for “such report” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 32 of 1949, s. 2.  
5. Subs . by the A.O. 1950, for “the Dominion of India”.  60 1[SUITS  BY ALIENS  AND BY OR AGAINST  FOREIGN  RULERS, AMBA SSADORS  AND ENVOYS ] 
83. When aliens may sue. —Alien enemies residing in India with the permission of the Central 
Government, and alien friends, may sue in any Court otherwise competent to try the suit, as if they were 
citizens of India, but alien enemies re siding in India without such permission, or residing in a foreign country, 
shall not sue in any such Court.  
Explanation. —Every person residing in a foreign country, the Government of which is at war with India 
and carrying on business in that country with out a licence in that behalf granted by the Central Government, 
shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be an alien enemy residing in a foreign country.  
84. When foreign States may sue. —A foreign State may sue in any competent Court:  
Provided that the object of the suit is to enforce a private right vested in the Ruler of such State or in 
any officer of such State in his public capacity.  
85. Persons specially appointed by Government to prosecute or defend on behalf of foreign       
Rulers. —(1) The Central Government may, at the request of the Ruler of a foreign State or at the request of 
any person competent in the opinion of the Central Government to act on behalf of such Ruler, by order, 
appoint any persons to prosecute or defend any suit on be half of such Ruler, and any persons so appointed 
shall be deemed to be the recognized agents by whom appearances, acts and applications under this Code 
may be made or done on behalf of such Ruler.  
(2) An appointment under this section may be made for the p urpose of a specified suit or of several 
specified suits, or for the purpose of all such suits as it may from time to time be necessary to prosecute or 
defend on behalf of such Ruler.  
(3) A person appointed under this section may authorise or appoint any o ther persons to make 
appearances and applications and do acts in any such suit or suits as if he were himself a party thereto.  
86. Suits against foreign Rulers, Ambassadors and Envoys. —(1) No. 2*** foreign State may be 
sued in any Court otherwise competent  to try the suit except with the consent of the Central Government 
certified in writing by a Secretary to that Government:  
Provided that a person may, as a tenant of immovable property, sue without such consent as aforesaid 
3[a foreign State] from whom he holds or claims to hold the property.  
(2) Such consent may be given with respect to a specified suit or to several specified suits or with 
respect to all suits of any specified class or classes, and may specify, in the case of any suit or class of 
suits, t he Court in which 4[the foreign State] may be sued, but it shall not be given, unless it appears to the 
Central Government that 4[the foreign State] —  
(a) has instituted a suit in the Court against the person desiring to sue 5[it], or  
(b) by 6[itself] or a nother, trades within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or  
(c) is in possession of immovable property situate within those limits and is to be sued with reference to 
such property or for money charged thereon, or  
(d) has expressly or impli edly waived the privilege accorded to 5[it] by this section.  
 7[(3) Except with the consent of the Central Government, certified in writing by a Secretary to that  
Government, no decree shall be executed against the property of any foreign State.]  
(4) The p receding provisions of this section shall apply in relation to — 
8[(a) any ruler of a foreign State; ] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 12, for the former heading and s ub-sections  83 to 87  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) .  
2. The words “Ruler of a” omitted by  Act 104 of 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “a Ruler” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “the Ruler (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “him” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 29, for “himself” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
8. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  61 1[(aa)] any Ambassador or Envoy of a foreign State;  
(b) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country; and  
(c) any such member of the staff 2[of the fore ign State or the staff or retinue of the Ambassador] or 
Envoy of a foreign State or of the High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country as the Central Government 
may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf . 
3[as they apply in relation to a fore ign State].  
4[(5) The following persons shall not be arrested under this Code , namely: — 
(a) any Ruler of a foreign State;   
(b) any Ambassador or Envoy of a foreign State ; 
(c) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country;  
(d) any such member of the sta ff of the foreign State or the staff or retinue of the Ruler, Ambassador 
or Envoy of a foreign State or of the High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country, as the Central 
Government may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf.  
(6) Where a requ est is made to the Central Government for the grant of any consent referred to in            
subsection ( 1), the Central Governm ent shall, before refusing to accede to the request in whole or in part , give 
to the person making the request a reasonable opp ortunity of being heard.]  
87. Style of foreign Rulers as parties to suits. —The Ruler of a foreign State may sue , and shall be  sued, 
in the name of his State:  
Provided that in giving the consent referred to in section 86, the Central Government may direct t hat the 
Ruler may be sued in the name of an agent or in any other name.  
87A. Definitions of “Foreign State ” and “Rulers ”.— (1) In this Part, —  
(a) “foreign State ” means any State outside India which has been recognised by the Central 
Government; and  
(b) “Ruler”, in relation to a foreign State, means the person who is for the time being recognized by 
the Central Governme nt to be the head of that State.  
(2) Every Court shall take judicial notice of the fact —  
(a) that a State has or has not been recognized by  the Central Government;  
(b) that a person has or has not been recognized by the Central Government to be the head of a  State.  
SUITS AGAINST RULERS OF FORMER INDIAN STATES  
87B. Applications of sections 85 and 86 to Rulers of former Indian States .—5[(1) In the case of any 
suit by or against the Ruler of any former Indian State which is based wholly or in part upon a cause of action 
which arose before the commencement of the Constitution or any proceeding arising out of such suit , the 
provisions of section 85  and sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 86 shall apply in relation to such Ruler as they 
apply in relation to the Ruler of a foreign State.]  
  (2) In this section —  
(a) “former Indian State ” means any such Indian State as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the purposes of this  ; 6***  
                                                      
1. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( aa) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 29  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid, for “or retinue of the Ruler, Ambassador” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. b y s. 29,  ibid, for “as they apply in relation to the Ruler of a foreign State” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by s. 29, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by Act 54 of 1972, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 9 -9-1972) . 
6. The word “and” omitted by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -9-1972) .  62 1[(b) “Comm encement of the Co nstitution ” means the 26th day of January, 1950; and 
(c) “Ruler ”, in relation to a former Indian State, has the same meaning as in article 363 of the 
Constitution. ]  
INTERPLEADER  
88. Where interpleader  suit may be instituted. —Where  two or more persons claim adversely to 
one another the same debts, sum of money or other property, movable or immovable, from another 
person, who claims no interest therein o ther than for charges or costs and who is ready to pay or deliver it 
to the rightful claimant, such other person may institute a suit of interpleader against all the claimants for 
the purpose of obtaining a decision as to the person to whom the payment or delivery shall be made and 
of obtaining indemnity for himself:  
Provided that where any suit is pending in which the rights of all parties can properly be decided, no 
such suit of interpleader shall be instituted.  
PART V  
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS  
ARBITRATION  
2[89. Settlement of disputes outs ide the Court. —(1) Where it appears to the Court that there exist 
elements of a settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, the Court shall formulate the terms of 
settlement and give them to the parties for their observa tions and after receiving the observations of the 
parties, the Court may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement and refer the same for: —  
(a) arbitration;  
(b) conciliation;  
(c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat ; or 
(d) mediation.  
(2) Were a dispute has been referred —  
(a) for arbitration or conciliation , the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation                           
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply as if the proceedings for arbitration or conciliation were r eferred 
for settlement under the provisions of that Act ; 
(b) to Lok Adalat, the Court shall refer the same to the Lok Adalat in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and all o ther 
provisions of that Act shall .apply in respect of the dispute so referred to the Lok Adalat;  
(c) for judicial settlement, the Court shall refer the same to a suitable institution or person and 
such institution or person shall be deemed to be a Lok Ada lat and all the provisions of the Legal 
Services Authority Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) shal l apply as if the dispute were referred to a Lok Adalat 
under the provisions of that Act;  
(d) for mediation, the Court shall effect a compromise between the parties and s hall follow such 
procedure as may be prescribed.]  
SPECIAL CASE  
90. Power to state case for opinion of Court. —Where  any person agree in writing to state a case for 
the opinion of the Court, then the Court shall try and determine the same in the manner presc ribed.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1972 , s. 3, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 9 -9-1972) . 
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002) ,  Earlier rep by Act 10 of 1940, s. 49 or the Third Schedule.  63 1[PUBLIC NUISANCES AND OTHER WRONGFUL ACTS AFFECTING THE PUBLIC ] 
91. Public nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting the public. —2[(1) In the case of a public 
nuisance or other wrongful act affecting, or likely to affect, the public, a suit for  a declaration and injunction 
or for such other relief as  may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case, may be instituted, —  
(a) by the Advocate -General, or  
(b) with the leave of the Court, by two or more persons, even though no special damage has b een 
caused to such persons by reason of such public nuisance or other wrongful act.]  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any right of suit which may 
exist independently of its provisions.  
392. Public charities. —(1) In the case of any alleged breach of any express or constructive trust 
created for public purposes of a charitable or religious nature, or where the direction of the Court is 
deemed necessary for the administration of any such trust, the Advocate -General, or t wo or more persons 
having an interest in the trust and having obtained the 4[leave of the Court,] may institute a suit, whether 
contentious or not, in the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction or in any other Court empowered in 
that behalf by the State Government within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of 
the subject -matter of the trust is situate to obtain a decree : —  
(a) removing any trustee;  
(b) appointing a new trustee;  
(c) vesting any property in a trustee;  
5[(cc) directing a trustee who has been removed or a person who has ceased to be a trustee, to 
deliver possession of any trust property in his possession to the person entitled to the possession of 
such property];  
(d) directing accounts and inquiries;  
(e) declari ng what proportion of the trust property or of the interest therein shall be allocated to 
any particular object of the trust;  
(f) authorizing the whole or any part of the trust property to be let, sold, mortgaged or exchanged;  
(g) settling a scheme; or  
(h) granting such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require.  
(2) Save as provided by the Religious Endowments Act, 1863 ( XX of 1863), 6[or by any 
corresponding law in force in 7[the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1 956, were 
comprised in Part B States]], no suit claiming any of the reliefs specified in sub -section (1) shall be 
instituted in respect of any such trust as is therein referred to except in conformity with the provisions of 
that sub -section.  
8[(3) The Cour t may alter the original purposes of an express or constructive trust created for public 
purposes of a charitable or religious nature and allow the property or income of such trust or any portion 
thereof to be applied cy pres in one or more of the followin g circumstances, namely: —  
(a) where the original purposes of the trust, in whole or in part :—  
(i) have been, as far as may be, fulfilled; or  
(ii) cannot be carried out at all, or cannot be carried out according to the directions given in 
the instrument c reating the trust or, where there is no such instrument, according to the spirit of 
the trust; or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 30, for the former headi ngs (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. S. 92 shall not apply to any religious trust in Bihar,  see Bihar Act 1 of 1951.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 31, for “consent in writing of the Advocate -General” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 9  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 13  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
7. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 2), 1956, for “a Part B State”.  
8. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  64 (b) wher e the original purposes of the trust provide a use for a part only of the property available by 
virtue of the trust; or  
(c) where the property  availab le by virtue of the trust and other property applicable for similar 
purposes can be more effectively used in conjunction with, and to that end can suitably be made 
applicable to any other purpose, regard being had to the spirit of the trust and its applica bility to common 
purposes; or  
(d) where the original purposes, in whole or in part, were laid down by reference to an area which then 
was, but has since ceased to be, a unit for such purposes; or  
(e) where the original purposes, in whole or in part, have, since they were laid down :—  
(i) been adequately provided for by other means, or  
(ii) ceased, as being useless or harmful to the community, o r 
(iii) ceased to be, in law, charitable, or  
(iv) ceased in any other way to provide a suitable and effective metho d of using the property 
available by virtue of the trust, regard being had to the spirit of the trust.]  
93. Exercise of powers of Advocate -General outside presidency -towns. —The powers conferred by 
sections 91 and 92 on the Advocate -General may, outside the  presidency -towns, be, with the previous 
sanction of the State Government, exercised also by the Collector or by such officer as the State 
Government may appoint in this behalf.  
PART VI  
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
94. Supplemental proceedings. —In order to pre vent the ends of justice from being defeated the 
Court may, if it is so prescribed,  —  
(a) issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause why he should 
not give security for his appearance, and if he fails to comply wi th any order for security commit him to 
the civil prison;  
(b) direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any property belonging to him and to place 
the same at the disposal of the Court or order the attachment of any property;  
(c) grant a temporar y injunction and in case of disobedience commit the person guilty thereof to 
the civil prison and order that his property be attached and sold;  
(d) appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the performance of his duties by attaching and 
selling his pr operty;  
(e) make such other interlocutory orders as may appear to the Court to be just and convenient.  
95. Compensation for obtaining arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient               
grounds. —(1) Where, in any suit in which an arrest or attach ment has been effected or a temporary 
injunction granted under the last preceding section, —  
(a) it appears to the Court that such arrest, attachment or injunction was applied for on insufficient 
grounds, or  
(b) the suit of the plaintiff fails and it appea rs to the Court that there was no reasonable or probable 
grounds for instituting the same,  
the defendant may apply to the Court, and the Court may, upon such application, award against the 
plaintiff by its order such amount 1[not exceeding fifty thousand rupees], as it deems a reasonable 
compensation to the defendant for the 2[expense or injury (including injur y to reputation) caused to him] : 
Provided that a Court shall not award, under this section an amount exceeding the limits of its pecuniar 
jurisdicti on. 
(2) An order determining any such application shall bar any suit for compensation in respect of such 
arrest, attachment or injunction.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 8, for “not exceeding one thousand rupees”  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 32, for “expense or injury caused to him” ( w.e.f. 1 -2-1977 ). 65 PART VII  
APPEALS  
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL  DECREES  
96. Appe al from original decree. —(1) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the body of this  
Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie from every decree passed by any 
Court exercising original jurisdiction  the Court authorized to hear appeals from the decisions of such Court.  
(2) An appe al may lie from an original decree passed ex parte.  
(3) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the Court with the consent of parties.  
1[(4) No appeal shall lie, except on a question of law, from a decree in any suit of the nature 
cognisable by Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value of the subject -matter of the original suit 
does not exceed 2[ten thousand rupees.]]  
97. Appeal from final decree where no appeal from preliminary de cree.—Where  any party 
aggrieved  by a preliminary decree passed aft er the commencement of this Code does not appeal from such 
decree,  he shall be precluded from disputing its correctness in any appeal which may be preferred from 
the final decree.  
98. Decision where appeal heard by two or more Judges. —(1) Where an appeal i s heard by a Bench 
of two or more Judges, the appeal shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or of the  
majority (if any) of such Judges.  
(2) Where there is no such majority which concurs in a judgment varying or reversing the decree 
appealed from, such decree shall be confirmed  : 
Provided that where the Bench hearing the appeal is 3[composed of two or other even number of 
Judges belonging to a Court consisting of more Judges than those constituting the Bench] and the Judges 
composing the Bench differ in opinion on a point of law, they may state the point of law upon which they 
differ and the appeal shall then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other Judges, and 
such point shall be decided according to the opinion of th e majority (if any) of the Judges who have heard 
the appeal , including those who first heard it.  
4[(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter or o therwise affect any provision of the letters to 
patent of any High Court.] 
99. No decree  to be rever sed or modified for error or irregularity not affecting merits or     
jurisdiction. —No decree shall be reversed or substantially varied, nor shall any case be remanded, in appeal 
on account of any misjoinder  5[or non -joinder] of parties or causes of action  or any error, defect or irregularity 
in any proceedings in the suit, not affecting the merits of the case or the jurisdiction of the Court:  
6[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to non -joinder of a necessary party.] 
7[99A. No order under sec tion 47 to be reversed or modified unless decision of the case is 
prejudicially affected. —Without  prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 99, no order under 
section 47 shall be reversed or substantially varied, on account of any error, def ect or irregularity in any 
proceeding relating to such order, unless such error, defect or irregularity has prejudicially affected the decision 
of the case.] 
APPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES  
8[100. Second appeal. —(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in t he body of this Code or by any 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 9, for “ three thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 18 of 1928, s. 2 and the First Sch edule . 
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 35 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Provi so Added  by s. 35 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
8. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for s ection 100 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
 66 other la w for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the High Court from every decree passed in 
appeal by any Court subordinate to the  High Court, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a 
substantial question of law.  
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex parte.  
(3) In an appeal under this section, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the substantial 
question of law involved in the appeal.  
(4) Where the Hi gh Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall 
formulate that question.  
(5) The appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and the respondent shall , at the hearing of 
the appeal, be allowed to argue that  the case does not involve such question:  
Provided  that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the 
Court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law, not 
formulated by i t, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala.  
In sub-section ( 1) of s ection 100  of the Principal Act, after clause ( c), the following clause shall be 
added,  namely:  
(d) the finding of the lower appellate court on any question of fact material to the right decision of the 
case on the merits being in conflict with the finding of the Court of first instance on such question.  
[Vide Kerala Act 13 of 1957 sec. 4 .]  
1[100A. No further appeal in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any Letters Patent 
for any High Court or in any instrument having the force of law or in any other law for the time being in force, 
where any appeal from an original or appellate decree or order is heard and decided by a Single Judge of a 
High Court, no further appeal shall lie from the judgment and decree of such Single Judge.]  
101. Second appeal on no other grounds. —No second appeal shall lie except on the ground 
mentioned in section 100.  
2[102. No second appeal in certain cases. —No second appeal shall lie from any decree, when the 
subject matter of the original suit is for recovery of money not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees.]  
3[103. Power of High Court to determine issue of fact. —In any second appeal, the High Court 
may, if t he evidence on the record is sufficient, determine any issue necessary for the disposal of the 
appeal ,—  
(a) which has not been determined by the lower Appellate Court or both by the Court of first 
instance and the lower Appellate Court, or  
(b) which has b een wrongly determined by such Court or Courts by reason of a decision on such 
question of law as is referred to in section 100.]  
APPEALS FROM ORDERS  
104. Orders from which appeal lies. —(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders, and save as 
otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any law for the time being in force, from no 
other orders: — 
4*  *   *   *   * 
5[(ff) an order under section 35A;]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 2 of 2002, s. 4, for section 100 A (w.e.f 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for s ection  102 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 40, for s ection  103 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Clauses  (a) to ( f) omitted by Act 10 of 1940, s. 49 and the Third Sch edule . 
5. Ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 3, see also foot -note to s ection  35A, Supra . 67 1[(ffa) an order under  section 91 or section 92 refusing leave to institute a suit of the  nature 
referred to in section 91 or section 92, as the case may be;]  
(g) an order under section 95;  
(h) an order under any of the provisions of this Code imposing a fine or directing the arrest or 
detention in the civil prison of any person except where s uch arrest or detention is in execution of a 
decree;  
(i) any order made under rules from which an appeal is expressly allowed by rules:  
5[Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order specified in clause (ff) save on the ground 
that no order, or an o rder for the payment of a less amount, ought to have been made.] 
(2) No appeal shall lie from any order passed in appeal under this section.  
105. Other orders. —(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, no appeal shall lie from any order 
made by a Court in the exercise of its original or appellate jurisdiction; but where a decree is appealed 
from, any error, defect or irregularity in any order, affecting the decision of the case, may be set forth as a 
ground of objection in the memorandum of appeal.  
(2) Notw ithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any party aggrieved by an order of 
remand 2*** from which an appeals lies does not appeal therefrom, he shall thereafter be precluded from 
disputing its correctness.  
106. What Courts to hear appeals. —Where  an appeal from any order is allowed it shall lie to the Court 
to which an appeal would lie from the decree in the suit in which such order was made, or where such order is 
made by a Court (not being a High Court) in the exercise of appellate jurisdi ction, then to the High Court.  
GENERAL  PROVISIONS RELATING TO APPEALS  
107. Powers of Appellate Court. —(1) Subject to such conditions and limitat ions as may be 
prescribed, an Appellate Court shall have power — 
(a) to determine a case finally;  
(b) to remand a  case;  
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial;  
(d) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken.  
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Appellate Court shall have the same powers and shall perform as nearly 
as may be the same duties as are conferred and imposed by this Code on Courts of original jurisdiction in 
respect of suits instituted therein.  
108. Procedure in appeals from appellate decrees and orders. —The provisions of this Part 
relating to appeals from original decree s shall, so f ar as may be, apply to appeals — 
(a) from appellate decrees, and  
(b) from orders made under this Code or under any special or local law in which a different 
procedure is not provided.  
APPEALS TO THE SUPREME  COURT  
3[109. When appeals lie to the Supreme Court .—Subject  to the provisions in Chapter IV of Part V of 
the Constitution and such rules as may, from time to time, be made by the Supreme Court regarding appeals 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 4 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Words “made after the commencement of this Code”  omitted by, s. 42 , ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 49 of 1973, s. 2, for s ection  109 (w.e.f. 29 -11-1973) . 68 from the Courts  of India, and to the provisions hereinafter contained, an appeal shall lie to t he Supreme Court 
from any judgment, decree or  final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court, if the High Court certifies — 
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance; and  
(ii) that in the opinion of the High Court the  said question needs to be decided by the Supreme 
Court. ] 
110. [Value of subject matters.] omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act, 1973 (49 of 
1973), s. 3 (w.e.f.  29-11-1973).  
111. [Bar of certain appeals. ] omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
1[111A.  [Appeals to Federal Court ] Rep. by the Federal Court Act, 1941 (21 of 1941), s. 2 (w.e.f.  1-9-
1942). 
112. Savings. —2[(1) Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed — 
(a) to affect the powers of the Supreme Court under article 136 or any other provision  of the 
Constitution; or  
(b) to interfere with any rules made by the Supreme Court, and for the time being in force for the 
presentation of appeals to that Court, or their conduct before that Court.]  
(2) Nothing herein contained applies to any matter of cr iminal or admiralty or vice -admiralty 
jurisdiction or to appeals from orders and decrees of Prize Courts.  
PART VIII  
REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION  
113. Reference to High Court. —Subject  to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, 
any Court may state a case and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court, and the High Court may 
make such order thereon as it thinks fit:  
3[Provided that where the Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a question as to the 
validity of any Act , Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained in an Act, Ordinance or 
Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, and is of opinion that 
such Act, Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative,  but has not been so declared by the 
High Court to which that Court is subordinate or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case 
setting out its opinion and the reasons therefor, and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court.  
Explanation. —In this section, “Regulation ” means any Regulation of the Bengal, Bombay or Madras 
Code or Regulation as defined in the General Clauses Act,1897, (10 of 1897) or in the General Clauses 
Act of a State.]  
114. Review .—Subject as aforesaid, any person considerin g himself aggrieved — 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Code, but from which no appeal 
has been preferred.  
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Code, or  
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court  of Small Causes,  
may apply for a review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order, and the 
Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.  
115. Revision. —4[(1)] The High Court may call for the record of any case which has been  decided by 
any Court subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if such subordinate 
Court appears — 
                                                      
1. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
2. Subs . by the A.O. 1950, for the former  sub-section (1). 
3. Added by Act 24 of 1951, s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
4. Section 115 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  69 (a) to have  exercised  a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or  
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or  
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity,  
the High Court may make such order in the case as it thinks fit:  
1[Provided that the High Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any order made, or any order 
deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or other proceeding, except where the order, if it had been made in 
favour of the party applying for revision would have finally disposed of the suit or other proceedings.]  
2[(2) The High Court shall not , under this section, vary or reverse any decree or order against which 
an appeal lies either to the High Court or to any Court subordinate thereto.  
3[(3) A revision shall not operate as a stay of suit or other proceeding before the Court except where 
such suit or other proceeding is stayed by the High Court.]  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “any case which has been decided” includes any order 
made, or any order deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding.]  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Orrisa 
Amendment of section 115 .—In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for section 115, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely: — 
115. Revision. —The High Court, in cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of the 
value ex ceeding one lakh rupees, and the District Court, in any other case including a case arising out of 
an original suit or other proceedings instituted before the commencement  of the Code of Civil Procedure 
( Orissa  Amendment) Act, 1991, may call for the rec ord of any case which  has been decided by any 
Court subordinate   to the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, and in which no appeal 
lies thereto, and if such subordinate Court appears — 
(a) to have failed to exercised  a jurisdiction not vested in it by law; or  
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested; or  
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity;  
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may  make such orde r in the case as it thinks fit:  
Provided that in respect of cases arising out of original suits, or other proceedings of any valuation 
decided by the District Court, the High Court alone shall be competent to m ake an order under this 
section:  
Provided furt her that the High Court or the District Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse 
any order, including an order deciding an issue, made in the course of a suit or other proceedings, except 
where — 
(i) the order, if so varied or reversed, would fi nally dispose of the suit or other proceedings; or  
(ii) the order, if allowed to stand, would  occasion a failure of justice or cause  irreparable injury  
to the party against whom it was made.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s.12, for “proviso ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s.12 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  70 Explanation —In this section , the expression “ any case which  has been decided” includes any 
order deciding an issue in the  course of a suit or other proceeding.”.  
3. Saving .—The amendment made by this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect  or 
consequence of anything already done or suffered, or any jurisdiction already exercised, and any 
proceeding instituted or commenced in the  High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908)  prior to the commencement of this Act shall,  notwithstanding such amendment , continue 
to be hea rd and decided by such Court.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 26 of 1991, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 115. —In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for section 115, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely: — 
115. Revision .—(1) The High Court, in cas es arising out of original suits or other proceedings of the 
value exceeding five lakhs rupees and the District Court, in any other cases, including a case arising out 
of an original suit or other proceedings  instituted before the commencement of the Code  of Civil 
Procedure ( Orissa Amendment) Act, 2010, may call for the record of any case  which has been decided  
by any Court subordinate to the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, and in which no 
appeal lies thereto, and if such subordina te Court appears — 
(a) to have exercised a jurisdict ion not vested in it by law; or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested; or  
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity,  
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may make such order in the case as it thinks fit:  
Provided that in respect of cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of any valuation 
decided by the District Court, the High Court alone shall be com petent to make an order under this 
section.   
(2) The High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, shall not under this section, vary or 
reverse any order, including an order deciding an issue, made in the course of a suit or other proceedings, 
except where the order, if it had been made in favor of the party applying for revision, would have finally 
disposed of the suit or other proceedings.  
(3) A revision shall not operate as a stay of suit or other proceeding before the Court except where 
such su it or other proceeding is stayed by the High Court or District Court, as the case may be.  
Explanation —In this section, the expression, “any case which has been decided” includes any order 
deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding.”.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 14 of 2010, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 115 of Act V of 1908. —In section 115 of the said Code — 
(i) for the words “High Court”, wherever occurring, the words “High Court or District Court” shall be 
substituted; and  
(ii) the fo llowing proviso thereto shall be inserted at the end, namely: -- 
 “Provide that nothing in this section shall be construed to empower the District Court to call for 
the record of any case arising out of an original suit of the value of twenty thousand rupee s or above,”.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1970 , s. 3]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution of new section for section 115 of 5 of 1908. — For section  115 of the Code  of Civil  71 Procedur e, 1908,  as amended  in its  application  to  Uttar  Pradesh  (hereinafter  in  this 
Chapter  referred  to as the said Code),  the following  section  shall  be substituted  namely  :— 
“115.  Revision .—The High  Court  in  cases  arising  out  of  original  suits  of  the 
value  of rupees  twenty  thousand  and above  including  such  suits  instituted  before the 
20th  day of  September,  1972,  and  the  District  Court in any other case, including a 
case arising out of an original suit  instituted  before  the 20th  day of September,  1972,  
may  call  for  the  record of any case which has been decided by any cou rt subordinate to  
such  High  Court  or  District  Court,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  in  which  no appeal  
lies thereto,  and if such  subordinate  court  appears;  
(a) to have  to jgh exercised  a jurisdiction  not vested  in it by law, or 
(b) to have  failed  to exercise  a jurisdiction  so vested,  or 
(c) to have  acted  in the  exercise  of  its  jurisdiction  illegally  or with  material  
irregularity,  
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may  make  such  order  in the 
case  as it thinks  fit; 
Provided t hat in respect of cases decided before the 20th day of September, 1972, and also all cases arising 
out of original suits of any valuation decided by the District Court, the High Court alone shall be competent to 
make a order under this section.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 19 of 1973, s. 2]  
Amendment  of section 115 of Act V of 1908. — In section  115 of the Code  of Civil  
Procedure,  1908  as amended in  its  application to  Uttar Pradesh, hereinafter referred to as  
the said Code  :— 
(i) for the words “the High Court  or District Court”, where they  first occur, the 
words “the High Court in cases arising out of original  suits  of the values  of twenty  
thousand  rupees  and above,  and the District  Court  in any other  case”  shall  be 
substituted  and after  the words  “High  Court  or District  Court”  where  they  occur  the  
second  time,  the commas  and words,  “as the case  may  be”, shall  be inserted;  
(ii) the proviso  shall  be omitted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 197 2, s. 6]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution  of section  115. — For section 115 o f the said Code, the following section 
shall  be substituted,  namely  :— 
“115. Revision .-- The  High Court,  in cases arising out of original suits or  other  proceedings  
of the value  of twenty  thousand  rupees  and above,  including  such  suits  or other  proceedin gs 
instituted  before  August  1,  1978,  and  the  District  Court  in  any  other  case,  including  a  case  
arising  out of an original  suit  or  other  proceedings  instituted  before  such date,  may  call for 
the record of  any case  which  has  been  deci ded by any court  subordinate  to such  High  Court  
or  District  Court  as  the  case  may be, and in which  no appeal  lies  thereto,  and  if  such  
subordinate  court  appears  — 
(a) to have  exercised  a jurisdiction  not vested  in it by law ; or 
(b) to have  failed  to exercise  a jurisdiction  so vested  ; or 
(c) to have  acted  in the exercise  of  its  jurisdiction  illegally  or  with  material  
irregularity  ; 
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may  make  72 such  order  in the case  as it thinks  fit ; 
Provided that i n respect of cases arising out of original suits or  other  
proceedings  of any  valuation,  decided  by the District  Court,  the  High  Court  
alone  shall  be competent  to  make  an  order  under  this  section  ; 
Provided further that the High Court or the District  Court shall  no 
under  his section, vary or reverse any order including an order  deciding an 
issue, made in the course of a suit or other proceeding,  except  where,  — 
(1) the order,  if  so varied or reversed, would finally  dispose  of  the suit or 
other  proceed ing ; or 
(ii) the order,  if allowed  to stand,  would  occasion  a failure  of  justice  or 
cause  irreparable  injury  to the party  against  whom  it  was  made.  
Explanation  — In this section, the expression ‘any case which  has been decided’ 
includes any order deci ding an issue in the course of  a suit  of other  Proceeding.”  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 31 of 1978, s. 3]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 115     of   Act  no. 5 of 1908. —In section 115 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, hereinafter int his Chapter refer red to as the said Code, -- 
(a) for the words  “of the value  of  the  twenty  thousand  rupees  and above  including  
such  suits  or other  proceedings  instituted  before  August  1, 1978”  the following  words  
shall  be substituted , namely  — 
“of the value  exceeding one  l akh rupees  or such higher amount  not exceeding  
five  lakh  rupees  as  the  High  Court  may  from  time  to  time fix, by notification 
published in the official Gazette including such  suits  or other proceedings instituted 
before  the date  of commencement  of the Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws  (Amendment) 
Act, 1991, or as the  case  may  be, the date  of commencement  of such  notification.”  ; 
(b) after  the  second  proviso,  the  following  proviso  shall  be inserted , 
namely  ; 
“Provided  also  that  where  a  proceeding of  the  nature  in which  the District  
Court  may  call for the record  and  pass  orders  under  this  section  was  pending  
immediately  before  the relevant  date  of commencement  referred  to above,  in the High  
Court,  such  court  shall  proceed  to dispose  of the same.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1991, s. 7]  
Substitution of section 115    of    Act   no. 5 of 1908. — For section  115  of  the  Code  of  Civil  
Procedure,  1908,  hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following section shall  be 
substituted and be  deemed to have  been substituted with effect  from  July  1, 2002,  namely  :— 
“115.  Revision  (1) A superior  court  may  revise  an  order  passed  in  a  case  decided  in an original  suit  
or other  proceeding  by  a  subordinate  court  where  no appeal  lies  agains t  the  order  
and  where  the subordinate  court  has — 
(a) exercised  a jurisdiction  not vested  in it by law ; or 
(b) failed  to exercise  a jurisdiction  so vested  ; or 
(c) acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material  irregularity.  
(2) A revision  applicat ion under  sub-section  (1),  when  filed  in  the High  Court,  
shall  contain  a certificate  on the first page  of such  application, below the  title of  the case,  
to the  effect that no revision in  the case lies to the district court but lies only to the High  73 Court either  because  of valuation  or because  the order  sought  to be  revised  was  passed  by 
the district  court.  
(3) The superior  court  shall  not, under  this section,  very  or  reverse  any order  made  
except  where,  — 
(i) the order,  if it had been  made  in favour  of the party  applying  for revision,  
would  have  finally  disposed  of the suit or other  proceeding  
; or 
(ii) the order,  if allowed  to stand,  would  occasion  a failure  of  justice  or cause  
irreparable  injury  to  the  party  against  whom  it  is  made.  
(4) A revision  shall  not operate  as a stay of suit or other  proceeding before  the 
court except  where such suit or other proceeding  is stayed  by the superior  court.  
Explanation  — I In this section, — 
(i) the expression  ‘superior  court’  means  — 
(a) the district court, where the valuati on of a case decided by a  court  subordinate  
to it does  not exceed  five lakh  rupees  ; 
(b) the High  Court,  where  the order  sought  to be  revised was  passed in a case 
decided by the district court or where the value of the  original  suit or other  proceedings  
in a case decided  by  a  court  subordinate  to the district  court  exceed  five lakh rupees  ; 
(ii) the expression ‘order’ includes an order deciding an issue in  any original  
suit or other  proceedings.  
Explanation  —II. The  provisions  of this  section  shall  also  be applica ble to orders 
passed, before or after the commencement of this  section,  in original  suits  or other  
proceedings  instituted  before  such  commencement.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2003, s. 2] 
PART IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE 1[HIGH COURTS 2[NOT BE ING THE COURT OF A 
JUDICIAL COMMISSIONER ]  
116. Part to apply only to certain High Courts. —This Part applies only to High Courts 7[not being 
the court of a Judicial Commissioner].  
117. Application of Code to High Courts. —Save as provided in this Part or in  Part X or in rules, the 
provisions of this Court shall apply to such High Courts.  
118. Execution of decree before ascertai nment of costs. —Where any such High Court considers it 
necessary that a decree passed in the exercise of its original civil jurisdict ion should be executed before 
the amount of the costs incurred in the suit can be ascertained by taxation, the Court may order that the 
decree shall be executed forthwith, except as to so much thereof as relates to the costs;  
and, as to so much thereof as relates to the costs, that the decree may be executed as soon as the 
amount of the costs shall be ascertained by taxation.  
119.Unauthorized persons not to address Court. —Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to authorize 
any person on behalf of another to a ddress the Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, or to 
examine witnesses, except where the Court shall have in the exercise of the power conferred by its charter 
authorized him so to do, or to interfere with the power of the High Court to make rules concerning 
advocates, vakils and attorneys.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 14, for “CHARTERED HIGH COURTS ”. 
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956 for “For Part A States and Part B States ”. 74 120. Provisions  not applicable to High Court in original civil jurisdiction. —(1) The following 
provisions shall not apply to the High Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, namely , 
sections 16, 17 and 20.  
1* * * * * 
PART X  
RULES  
121. Effect of rules in First Schedule. —The rules in a First Schedule shall have effect as if enacted 
in the body of this Code until annulled or altered in accordance with the provisions of this Part.  
122. Power  of certain High Courts to make rules. —2[High   Courts 3[not being the Court of a 
Judicial Commissioner]] 4*** may, from time to time after previous publication, make rules regulating 
their own procedure and the procedure of the Civil Courts subjects to their superintendence, and may by 
such rules annul, alter or add to all or any of the rules in the First Schedule.  
123. Constitution of Rules Committees in certain States. —(1) A Committee, to be called the Rule 
Committee, shall be constituted  at 5[the t own which is the usual place of sitting of each of the High Courts 
6*** referred to in section 122].  
(2) Each such Committee shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) three Judges of the High Court established at the town at which such Committee  is constituted, 
one of whom at least has served as a District Judge or 7*** a Divisional Judge for three years,  
8[(b) two legal practitioners enrolled in that Court,]  
9[(c) a Judge of a Civil Court subordinate to the High Court, 10*** 
 11*   *   *   *             * 
(3) The members of each Committee shall be appointed by the 12[High Court], which shall also 
nominate one of their number to be President:  
13*   *   *   *   * 
(4) Each member of any such Committee shall hold office for such period as may be prescrib ed by 
the 8[High Court] in this behalf; and whenever any member retires, resigns, dies or ceases reside in the 
State in which the Committee was constituted, or becomes incapable of acting as a member of the 
Committee, the said  8[High Court] may appoint ano ther person to be a member in his stead.  
(5) There shall be a secretary to each such Committee, who shall be appointed by the 8[High Court] 
and shall receive such remuneration as may be provided in this behalf 14[by the State Government].  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Assam. — 
For clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 123 the following shall be substituted — 
                                                      
1. Sub-section (2) rep. by Act 3 of 1909, s. 127 and the Third Sch.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Courts which ar e High Courts for the purposes of the Government of India Act, 1935”.  
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “for Part A States and Part B S tates”. The words in italics were ins. by Act 
2 of 1951, s. 15  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
4. The words “and the Chief Court of Lower Burma” rep. by Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule . 
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 1916, s. 2 and the Schedule , for “each of the to wns of Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, Allahabad, 
Lahore and Rangoon”.  
6. The words “and of the Chief Court” omitted by the Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule.  These words were again ins. by Act 
32 of 1925, and subsequently omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
7. The brackets and words “(in Burma)” rep. by Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule . 
8. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 16, for cl ause s (b) and (c). 
9. Clauses (d) and ( e) re-lettered as cl auses  (c) and (d) respectively by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1961 ). 
10. The word “and” omitted by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
11. Clause (d) omitted by s. 3 , ibid. and the Second Sch edule . 
12. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 44, for “Chief Justice or Chief Judge” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
13. Proviso omitted by s. 44, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
14. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “by the G.G. in C. or by the L.G., as the case may be”.  75 “(a) three  Judges of the High Court established at the town at which such Committee is constituted, 
provided that  the Chief Justice may appoint only two Judges of t he High Court on the Committee if the 
number of Judges of the High Court does not exceed three. ”  
[Vide Assam Act 8 of 1953, sec. 2.]  
Tamil Nadu  
Amendment of section 123, Central Act V of 1908 .—In section (2) of section 123 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 ( Central Act V of 1908), - 
(a) in clause (b), for the words “two legal practitioners”, the words “three legal practitioners” 
shall be substituted.  
(b) in clause (d), the word “Madras” shall be omitted.  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1970, s. 2]  
124. Commi ttee to report to High Court. —Every  Rule Committee shall make a report to the High 
Court established at the town at which it is constituted on any proposal to annul, alter or add to the rules 
in the First Schedule or to make new rules, and before making an y rules under section 122 the High Court 
shall take such report into consideration.  
 125. Power of other High Courts to make rules. —High  Courts, other than the Courts 
specified in section 122, may exercise the powers conferred by that section in such manne r and 
subject to such conditions 1[as 2[the State Government] may determine :] 
Provided that any such  High Court may, after previous publication, make a rule extending within the 
local limits of its jurisdiction any rules which have been made by any other H igh Court.  
3[126. Rules to be subject to approval. —Rules  made under the foregoing provisions shall be subject to 
the previous approval of the Government of the State in which the Court whose procedure the rules regulate 
is situate or, if that Court is not situate in any State, to the previous approval of 4[Central Government.]]  
127. Publication of rules. —Rules  so made and 5[approved] shall be published in the 6[Official Gazette], and 
shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may be speci fied have the same force and effect, within 
the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court which made them, as if they had been contained in the First 
Schedule.  
128. Matters for which rules may provide. —(1) Such rules shall be not inconsistent with  the provisions in the 
body of this code, but, subject thereto, may provide for any matters relating to the procedure of Civil Courts.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1), 
such rules may pro vide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the service  of summonses, notices and other processes by post or in any other manner either  
generally or in any specified areas, and the proof of such service;  
(b) the maintenance and custody, whil e under attachment, of live -stock and other movable 
property, the fees payable for such maintenance and custody, the sale of such live -stock and property, 
and the proceeds of such sale;  
(c) procedure in suits by way of counterclaim, and the valuation of su ch suits for the purposes of 
jurisdiction;  
(d) procedure in garnishee and charging orders either in addition to, or in substitution for, the 
attachment and sale of debts;  
(e) procedure where the defendant claims to be entitled to contribution or indemnity over against 
any person whether a party to the suit or not;   
(f) summary procedure — 
(i) in suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money payable 
by the defendant, with or without interest, arising — 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Sch edule,  Pt. I, for “as the G.G. in C. may determine”.  
2. Subs. by the A.O.1937, for “in the case of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner of Coorg, the G.G. in C., and, in other cases           
the L.G.” . 
3. Subs. by the A.O.1937, for s ection  126. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Governor General”.  
5. Subs. by Act 24 of 1917 , s. 2 and the First Sch edule , for “sanctioned”.  
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Ga zette of India or in the local O fficial Gazette, as the case may be”. Strictly the substitution            
would read “Official Gazette or in the Official Gazette, as the ca se may be, but the latter words have been omitted as being 
redundant”.  76 on a contract e xpress or implied; or  on an enactment where the sum sought to be recovered is a 
fixed sum of money or in the nature of a debt other than a penalty; or  
on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or a liquidated demand 
only;  or on a trust; or  
(ii) in suits  for the recovery of immovable property, with or without a claim for rent or mesne profits , 
by a landlord against a tenant whose term has expired or has been duly determined by notice to quit, or has 
become liable to forefei ture for non -payment of rent, or against persons claiming under such tenant;  
(g) procedure by way of originating summons;  
(h) consolidation of suits, appeals and other proceedings;  
(i) delegation to any Registrar, Prothonotary or Master or other official o f the Court of any 
judicial, quasi -judicial and non judicial duties; and  
(j) all forms, registers, books, entries and accounts which may be necessary or desirable for the 
transaction of the business of Civil Courts.  
129. Power of High Courts to make rules as to their original Civil procedure. —Notwithstanding 
anything in this Code,  any High Court 1[not being the Court of a Judicial Commissioner] may make such 
rules not inconsistent with the Letters Patent 2[or order] 3[or other law] establishing it to regula te its own 
procedure in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction as it shall think fit, and nothing herein contained 
shall affect the validity of any such rules in force at the commencement of this Code.  
4[130. Powers of other High Courts to make ru les as to matters other than procedure. —A High 
Court 5[not being a High Court to which section 129 applies] may, with the previous approval of the State 
Government, make with respect to any matter other than procedure any rule which a High Court 6[for a 
7*** State] might under 8[article 227 of the Constitution] make with respect to any such matter for any 
part of the territories under its jurisdiction which is not included within the limits of a presidency town.]  
131. Publication of rules. —Rules made in acc ordance with section 129 or section 130 shall be 
published in the 9[Official Gazette] and shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may 
be specified have the force of law.  
PART XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
132. Exemption of certain women from perso nal appearance. —(1) Women who, according to the 
customs and manners of the country, ought not to be compelled to appear in public shall be exempt from 
personal appearance in Court.  
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt such women from arre st in execution of civil 
process in any case in which the arrest of women is not prohibited by this Code.  
133. Exemption of other persons. —10[(1) The following persons shall be entitled to exemption from 
personal appearance in Court, namely: — 
(i) the Presid ent of India;  
(ii) the Vice -President of India;  
(iii) the Speaker of the House of the People;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “for a Part A State or a Part B State”.  
2. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 17  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
4. Subs.  by the A.O. 1937, for s ection  130. 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “not constituted by His Majesty by Letters Patent”.  
6. Subs., ibid., for “so constituted”.  
7. The word and letter “Part A” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
8. Subs. by  the A.O. 1950, for “section 224 of the Government of India Act, 1935”.  
9. Subs. by the A. O.1937, for “Gazette of India or in the Local Official Gazette, as the case may be”. Strictly the substitution 
would read “Official Gazette or in the Official Gazette , as the case may be,” but the latter words have been omitted as being 
redundant.  
10. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 77 (iv) the Ministers  of the Union;  
(v) the Judges  of the Supreme Court;  
(vi) the Governors of States and the administrators of Union territories;  
(vii) the Speakers  of the State Legislative Assemblies;  
(viii) the Chairman of the State Legislative Councils;  
(ix) the Ministers of States;  
(x) the Judges of the High Courts; and  
(xi) the persons to whom section 87B applies.]  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(3) Where any person  2*** cl aims the privilege of such exemption, and it is consequently necessary to 
examine him by commission, he shall pay the costs of that commission, unless the party requiring his 
evidence pays such costs.  
134. Arrest other than in execution of decree. —The provisions of sections 55, 57 and 59 shall 
apply, so far as may be, to all persons arrested under this Code.  
135. Exemption from arrest under civil process .—(1) No Judge, Magistrate or other judicial officer 
shall be liable to arrest under civil process while going to, presiding in, or returning from, his Court.  
(2) Where any matter is pending before a tribunal having jurisdiction therein, or believing in good 
faith that it has such jurisdiction, the parties thereto, their pleaders, mukhtars, revenue -agents and  
recognized agents, and their witnesses acting in obedience to a summons, shall be e xempt from arrest 
under civil process other than process issued by such tribunal for contempt of Court while going to or 
attending such tribunal for the purpose of such mat ter, and while returning from such tribunal.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section  (2) shall enable a judgment -debtor to claim exemption from arrest under 
an order for immediate execution or where such judgment -debtor attends to show cause why he should 
not be commit ted to prison in execution of a decree.  
3[135A . Exemption of members of legislative bodies from arrest and detention under civil 
process .—4[(1) No person shall be liable to arrest or detention in prison under civil process — 
(a) if he is a member of — 
(i) either House of Parliament, or  
(ii) the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State, or  
(iii) a Legislative Assembly of a Union territory,  
during the continuance of any meeting of such House of Parliament or, as the case may be, of the 
Legislative  Assembly or the Legislative Council;  
(b) if he is a member of any committee of —  
(i) either House of Parliament, or  
(ii) the Legislative Assembly of a State or Union territory, or  
(iii) the Legislative Council of a State, during the continuance of any mee ting of such 
 committee;  
(c) if he is a member of —  
(i) either House of Parliament, or  
                                                      
1. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 66 of 19 56, s. 12  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
2. The words “so exempted” omitted by s. 12, ibid.  
3. Ins. by Act 23 of 1925, s. 3.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 45, for sub -section (1) (w.e. f. 1-2-1977).  78 (ii) a Legis lative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State having both such Houses,  
during the continuance of a joint sitting, meeting, conference or joint committee of the Houses of 
Parliament or, Houses of the State Legislature, as the case may be,  and during the forty days before and 
after such meeting, sitting or conference.]  
(2) A person released from detention under sub -section ( 1) shall, subject to the provision s, of the said  
sub-section, be liable to re -arrest and to the further detention to which he would have been liable if he had 
not been released under the provis ions of sub -section ( 1).] 
136. Procedure where person to be arrested or property to be attached is outside district. —(1) 
Where an application is made that any person shall be arrested or that any property shall be attached 
under any provision of this Code not relating to the execution of decrees, and such person resides or such 
property is situate ou tside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court to which the application is made, 
the Court may, in its discretion, issue, a warrant of arrest of make an order of attachment, and send to the 
District Court within the loca l limits of whose jurisdict ion such person or property resides or is situate a 
copy of the warrant or order, together with the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment.  
(2) The District Court shall, on receipt of such copy and amount, cause the arrest or attachment t o be 
made by its own officers, or by a Court subordinate to itself, and shall inform the Court which issued or 
made such warrant or order of the arrest or attachment.  
(3) The Court making an arrest under this section shall send the person arrested to the C ourt by which 
the warrant of arrest was issued, unless he shows cause to the satisfaction of the former Court why he 
should not be sent to the later Court, or unless he furnishes sufficient security for his appearance before 
the later Court or for satisfyi ng any decree that may be passed against him by that Court, in either of 
which cases the Court making the arrest shall release him.  
(4) Where a person to be arrested or movable property to be attached under this section is within the 
local limits of the or dinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Fort William in 
Bengal or at Madras or at Bombay, 1*** the copy of the warrant of arrest or of the order of attachment, 
and the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment, shall be sent to the Court of Small -
Causes of Calcutta,  Madras 2[or Bombay], as the case may be, and that Court, on receipt of the copy and 
amount, shall proceed as if it were the District Court.  
137. Language of subordinate Courts. —(1) The language which,  on the commencement of this 
Code, is the language of any Court subordinate to a High Court shall continue to be the language of such 
subordinate Court until the State Government otherwise directs.  
(2) The State Government may declare what shall be the lan guage of any such Court and in what 
character applications to and proceedings in such Courts shall be written.  
(3) Where this Court requires or allows anything other that the recording of evidence to be done in 
writing in any such Court, such writing may b e in English; but if any party or his pleader is unacquainted 
with English a translation into the language of the Court shall, at his request, be supplied to him; and the 
Court shall make such order as it thinks fit in respect of the payment of the costs o f such translation.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 137,  Central Act V of 1908. -In section 137 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central 
Act V of 1908), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, for sub -section  (3), the following s ub-section shall be 
substituted, namely: - 
"(3) Wherever this Code requires or allows anything other than the recording of evidence to be 
done in writing in any such court, such writing shall be in Hindi in Devnagri Script with the interna -
tional form of In dian numerals :  
Provided that the court may in its discretion accept such writing in Eng lish on the undertaking of 
the party filing such writing, to file a Hindi translation of the same, within such time as may be 
granted by the court and the opposite par ty shall have a right to have a copy of such writing in Hindi."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 7 of 1983, s. 2]  
3[138. Power  of High Court to require evidence to be recorded in English. —(1) The 4[High 
Court] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct with r espect to any Judge specified in the 
                                                      
1. The words or “of the Chief Court of Lower Burma”, omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
2. Subs.  by the A.O. 1937 , for “Bombay or Rang oon”.  
3. For s. 138, as applicable to Assam, see the Civil Procedure (Assam Amendment) Act 1941, (Assam 1 of 1941),   
s. 2.  
4. Subs. by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and  the Schedule,  Pt. I , for “L.G.”.  79 notification, or falling under a description set forth therein, that evidence in cases in which an appeal is 
allowed shall be taken down by him in the English language and in manner prescribed.  
(2) Where a Judge is prev ented by any sufficient reason from complying with a direction under      
sub-section ( 1), he shall record the reason and cause the evidence to be taken down in writing from his 
dictation in open Court.  
139. Oath  on affidavit by whom to be administered. — In the case of any affidavit under this Code — 
(a) any Court or Magistrate, or  
1[(aa) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952); or]  
(b) any officer or other person whom a High Court may appoint in this behalf , or 
(c) any officer appoin ted by any other Court which the State Government has generally or 
specially empowered in this behalf,  
may administer the oath to the deponent.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of section 139 of Act no. 5  of 1908. — In section 139 of the Code of Civ il 
Procedure, 1908, for  clauses (b) and (c), the following shall be substituted and be 
deemed  always  to have  been  substituted,  namely  :— 
“(b)  any  person  appointed  in this  behalf  by a High  Court  or by a District  Court  ; or 
(c) any person  appointed  in this behalf  by  such other  Court  as  the State  Government  may,  by  
general  or  special  order,  empower  in  this behalf”  ; 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 11 of 1981, s. 2]  
140. Assessors in causes of salvage, etc. —(1) In any admiralty or vice -admiralty cause of sal vage to 
wage or collision the Court, whether it be exercising its original or its appellate jurisdiction, may, if it 
thinks fit, and shall upon request of either party to such cause, summon to its assistance, in such manner as 
it may direct or as may be pr escribed, two competent assessors; and such assessors shall attend and assist 
accordingly.  
(2) Every such assessor shall receive such fees for his attendance, to be paid by such of the parties 
as the Court may direct or as may be prescribed.  
141. Miscellan eous proceedings. —The procedure provided in this Code in regard to suit s shall be 
followed, as far as it can be made applicable, in all proceedings in any Court of c ivil jurisdiction.  
2[Explanation. — In this section, the expression “proceedings ” includes p roceedings under      
Order IX, but does not include any proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution.]  
142. Orders and notices to be in writing. —All orders and notices served on or given to any 
person under the provision s of this Code shall be in wri ting. 
143. Postage. —Postage, where chargeable on a notice, summons or letter issued under this Code 
and forwarded by post, and the fee for registering the same, shall be paid within a time to be fixed 
before the communication is made:  
Provided that the Sta te Government 3*** may remit such postage, or fee, or both, or may prescribe 
a scale of court -fees to be levied in lieu thereof . 
144. Application for restitution. —(1) Where and in so far as a decree 4[or an order] is 5[varied or 
reversed in any appeal, rev ision or other proceeding or is set aside or modified in any suit instituted for the 
purpose, the Court which passed the decree or order] shall, on the application of any party entitled to any 
benefit by way of restitution or otherwise, cause such restitut ion to be made as will, so far as may be, place 
the parties in the  position which they would have occupied but for such decree 4[or order] or 6[such part 
thereof as has been varied, reversed, set aside or modified]; and for this purpose, the Court may make  any 
orders, including orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of interest, damages, compensation and 
mesne profits , which are properly  7[consequential on such variation, reversal, setting aside or modification 
of the decree or order].  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 46 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 47, ibid. (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
3. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G, in C.” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s . 2 and the First Sch edule  I, Pt. I  
4. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 13  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976. s. 48, for “varied o r reversed, the Court of first instance” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for “such part thereof as has been varied or reversed” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for “consequential on such variation or reversal” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  80 1[Explana tion.—For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the expression “Court which passed the 
decree or order ” shall be deemed to include, — 
(a) where the decree or order has been varied or reversed in exercise of appellate or revisional 
jurisdiction, the Court of firs t instance;  
(b) where the decree or order has been set aside by a separate suit, the court of first instance 
which passed such decree or order.  
(c) where the  Court of first instance has ceased to exist or has ceased to have jurisdiction to execute, it, 
the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree or order was passed were instituted at the time of making 
the application for restitution under this section, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.]  
(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaini ng any restitution or other relief which could 
be obtained by application under sub -section ( 1). 
145. Enforcement of liability of surety. —Where  any person 2[has furnished security or given a 
guarantee] — 
(a) for the performance of any decree or any part the reof, or  
(b) for the restitution of any property taken in execution of a decree, or  
(c) for the payment of any money, or for the fulfilment of any condition imposed on any person, 
under an order of the Court in any suit or in any proceeding consequent ther eon, 
3[the decree or order may be executed in the manner therein provided for the execution of decrees, 
namely: —  
(i) if he has rendered himself personally liable, against him to that extent;  
(ii) if he has furnished any property as security, by sale of su ch property to the extent of the 
security;  
(iii) if the case falls both under clauses (i) and (ii) then to the extent specified in those clauses,  
and such person shall, be deemed to be a party within the meaning of section 47]:  
Provided that such notice as  the Court in each case thinks sufficient has been given to the surety.  
146. Proceedings by or against representatives. —Save  as otherwise provided by this Code or by 
any law for the time being in force, where any proceeding may be taken or application made  by or against 
any person then the proceeding may be taken or the application may be made by or against any person 
claiming under him.  
147. Consent or agreement  by persons under disability. —In all suits to which any person under 
disability is a party, any consent or agreement, as to any proceeding shall, if given or made with the 
express leave of the Court by the next friend or guardian for the suit, have the same force and effect as if 
such person, were under no disability and had given such consent or mad e such agreement.  
148. Enlargement of time. —Where  any period is fixed or granted by the Court for the doing of any act 
prescribed or allowed by this Code, the Court may, in its discretion, from time to time, enlarge such period, 
4[not exceeding thirty days  in total,] even though the period originally fixed or granted may have expired.  
5[148A. Right to lodge a caveat. —(1) Where an application is expected to be made, or has been 
made, in a suit or proceeding instituted, or about to be instituted, in a Court, any person claiming a right 
to appear before the Court on the hearing of such application may lodge a caveat in respect thereof.  
(2) Where a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1), the person by whom the caveat has been 
lodged (hereinafter referred t o as the caveator) shall serve a notice of the caveat by registered post, 
                                                      
1. Ins. by  Act 104 of 1976, s. 48 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 49, ibid., for “has become liable as surety” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by  s. 49,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1977).  81 acknowledgem ent due, on the person by whom the application has been, or is expected to be, made, under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Where, after a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1), any application is filed in any suit or 
proceeding, the Court, shall serve a notice of the application on the caveator.  
(4) Where a notice of any caveat has been served on the applicant, he shall forthwith furnish the 
caveator at the caveator’s expense , with a copy of the application made by him and also with copies of 
any paper or document which has been, or may be, filed by him in support of the application.  
(5) Where  a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1), such caveat shall not remain in forc e after 
the expiry of ninety days from the date on which it was lodged unless the application referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) has been made before the expiry of the said period.]  
149. Power to make up deficiency of court -fees.—Where the whole or any part of any fee prescribed for 
any document by the law for the time being in force relating to court -fees has not been paid, the Court may, in 
its discretion, at any stage, allow the person, by whom such fee is payable, to pay the whole or part, as the case 
may be, of such court -fee; and upon such payment the document, in respect of which fee is payable, shall have 
the same force and effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance.  
150. Transfer of business. — Save as otherwise provided, where the busin ess of any Court is transferred 
to any other Court, the Court  to which the business is so transferred shall have the same powers and shall 
perform the same duties as those respectively conferred and imposed by or under this Code upon the Court 
from which t he business was so transferred.  
151. Saving of inherent powers of Court. —Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or 
otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of 
justice or to prevent abuse o f the process of the Court.  
152. Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders. —Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in 
judgments, decrees or orders or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may at any 
time be corrected by the Court either of  its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.  
153. General power to amend. — The Court may at any time, and on such terms as to costs or otherwise 
as it may think fit, amend any defect or error in any proceeding in a suit; and all necessary a mendments shall be 
made for the purpose of determining the real question or issue raised by or depending on such proceeding.  
1[153A. Power to amend decree or order where appeal is summarily dismissed. —Where an Appellate 
Court dismisses an appeal under rule  11 of Order XLI, the power of the Court to amend, under section 152, the 
decree or order appealed against may be exercised by the Court which had passed the decree or order in the 
first instance, notwithstanding that the dismissal of the appeal has the ef fect of confirming the decree or order, 
as the case may be, passed by the Court of first instance.  
153B. Place of  trial to be deemed to be open Court. —The place in which any Civil Court is held 
for the purpose of trying any suit shall be deemed to be an op en Court, to which the public generally may 
have access so far as the same can conveniently contain them:  
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into or trial of 
any particular case, that the public gener ally, or any particular person, shall not have access to, or be or 
remain in, the room or building used by the Court.]  
154. [Saving of present right of appeal. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (48 of 1952 ), 
s. 2 and the First Sch edule . 
155. [Amendment of certain Acts. ] Rep. by s.  2 and the First Sch edule ., ibid.  
156. [Repeals. ] Rep. by the Second Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (17 of 1914). s. 3 and the Second 
Schedule . 
157. Continuance of orders under repealed enactments. —Notification s publi shed, declarations 
and rules made, place s appointed, agreements filed, scales prescribed, forms framed, appointments made 
and powers conferred under Act VIII of 1859 or under any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending 
the same or under any other enact ment hereby repealed shall, so far as the y are consistent with this Code,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976. s. 51 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  82 have the  same force and effect as if they had been respectively published, made, appointed, filed, 
prescribed, framed and conferred under this Code and by the authority empowered the reby in such behalf.  
158. Reference to Code of Civil Procedure and other repealed enactments. —In every enactment 
or notification passed or issued before the commencement of this Code in which reference is made to or 
to any Cha pter or section of Act VIII of 1859 or any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending the 
same or any other enactment hereby repealed, such reference shall, so far as may be practicable, be taken 
to be made to this Code or to its corresponding Part, Order, section or rule.  
______  83 THE  FIRST SCHEDULE  
_____  
 
ORDER I  
Parties to Suits  
1[1. Who may be joined as plaintiffs. —All persons may be joined in one suit as plaintiffs where — 
(a) any right to relief in respect of, or arising out of , the same act or transaction or series of acts or 
transactions is alleged to exist in such persons, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative; and  
(b) if such persons brought separate suits, any common question of law or fact would 
arise. ] 
2. Power of Court to order separate trial. —Wher e it appears to the Court that any joinder of 
plaintiffs may embarrass or delay the trial of the suit, the Court may put the plaintiffs to th e election or 
order separate trials or make such other order as may be expedient.  
1[3. Who may be joined as defendants. —All persons may be joined in one suit as defendants 
where —  
(a) any right to relief in respect of , or arising out of , the same act or transaction or series of acts or 
transactions is alleged to exist agai nst such persons , whether jointly , severally or in the alter native ; 
and 
(b) if separate suits were brought against such persons, any common question of law or fact 
would arise. ]  
2[3A. Power to order separate trials where joinder of defendants may embarrass or delay 
trial. —Where  it appears to the Court that any joi nder of defendants may embarrass or delay the trial of 
the suit, the Court may order separate trials or make such other order as may be expedient in the interests 
of justice. ]  
4. Court may give judgment for or against one or more of joint parties. —Judgmen t may be given 
without  any amendment — 
(a) for such one or more of the plaintiffs as may be found to be entitled to relief , for such relief 
as he or they may be entitled to;  
(b) against such one or more of the defendants as may be found to be liable , accor ding to their 
respective liabilities.  
5. Defendant need not be interested in all the relief claimed. —It shall not be necessary that every 
defendant shall be interested as to all the relief claimed in any suit against him.  
6. Joinder of parties liable on sa me contract. —The plaintiff may, at his option, join as parties to 
the same suit all or any of the persons severally, or jointly and severally, liable on any one contract, 
including parties to bills of exchange, hundis and promissory notes.  
7. When  plaintif f in doubt from whom redress is to be sought. —Where  the plaintiff is in doubt as to 
the persons from whom he is entitled to obtain redress, he may join two or more defendants in order that the 
question as to which of the defendants is liable, and to what e xtent, may be determined as between all 
parties.
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 52, for rules 1 and 3 respectively (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 52, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  84 
 1[8. One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same interest. —(1) Where there are 
numerous persons having the same interest in one suit, —  
(a) one or more of such persons may, with the permission of t he Court, sue or be sued, or may 
defend such suit, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all persons so interested;  
(b) the Court may direct that one or more of such persons may sue or be sued, or may defend 
such suit, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, a ll persons so interested.  
(2) The Court shall, in every case where a permission or direction is given under sub -rule (1), at the 
plaintiff's expense, give notice of the institution of the suit to all persons so interested, either by personal 
service, or, w here, by reason of the number of persons or any other cause, such service is not reasonably 
practicable, by public advertisement, as the Court in each case may direct.  
(3) Any person on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, a suit is instituted, or defended,  under                 
sub-rule ( 1), may apply to the Court to be made a party to such suit.  
(4) No part of the claim in any such suit shall be abandoned under sub -rule (1), and no such suit shall 
be withdrawn under sub -rule (3), of rule 1 of Order XXIII, and no agreement, compromise or satisfaction 
shall be recorded in any such suit under rule 3 of that Order, unless the Court has given, at the plaintiff's 
expense, notice to all persons so interested in the manner specified in sub -rule (2). 
(5) Where any p erson suing or defending in any such suit does not proceed with due diligence in the suit 
or defence, the Court may substitute in his place any other person having the same interest in the suit.  
(6) A decree passed in a suit under this rule shall be bindin g on all persons on whose behalf, or for 
whose benefit, the suit is instituted, or defended, as the case may be.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of determining whether the persons who sue or are sued, or defend, 
have the same interest in one suit, it is not n ecessary to establish that such persons have the same cause 
of action as the persons on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, they sue or are sued, or defend the suit, as 
the case may be.]  
2[8A. Power of Court to permit a person or body of persons to present  opinion or to take part in the 
proceedings. — While trying a suit, the Court may, if satisfied that a person or body of persons is interested in 
any question of law which is directly and substantially in issue in the suit and that it is necessary in the pu blic 
interest to allow that person or body of persons to present his or its opinion on that question of law, permit that 
person or body of persons to present such opinion and to take such part in the proceedings of the suit as the 
Court may specify.] 
9. Mi sjoinder and non -joinder. —No suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or                         
non-joinder of parties, and the Court may in every suit deal with the matter in controversy so far as 
regards the rights and interests of the parties  actually before it:  
3[Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to non -joinder of a necessary party.]  
10. Suit in name of wrong plaintiff. —(1) Where a suit has been instituted in the name of the wrong 
person as plaintiff or where it is doubtful wheth er it has been instituted in the name of the right plaintiff , 
the Court may at any stage of the suit, if satisfied that the suit has been instituted through a bona fide  
mistake , and that it is necessary for the determination of the real matter in dispute s o to do, order any 
other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon such terms as the Court thinks just.  
(2) Court may strike out or add parties. —The Court may at any stage of the proceedings, either 
upon or without the application of either party , and on such terms as may appear to the Court to be just, 
order that the name of any party improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out, and 
that the name of any person who ought to have been join ed, whether as plaintiff or defendan t, or whose 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 52, for rule 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 52, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. The proviso added by, ibid., s. 52 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   85 
 presence before the Court may be necessary in order to enable the Court effectually and completely to 
adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit, be added.  
(3) No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing without a next friend or as the next friend of a 
plaintiff under any disability without his consent.  
(4) Where defendant added, plaint to be amended. —Where a defendant is added , the plaint shall, 
unless the Court otherwise directs, be amended in such manner as may be nec essary, and amended copies 
of the summons and of the plaint shall be served on the new defendant and , if the Court thinks fit , on the 
original defendant  
(5) Subject to the provisions of the  1[Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (XV  of 1877)] , section 22, the 
proce edings as against any person added as defendant shall be deemed to have begun only on the service 
of the summons.  
2[10A. Power of Court to request any pleader to address it. —The Court may, in its discretion , 
request any pleader to address it as to any inte rest which is likely to be affected by its decision on any 
matter in issue in any suit or proceeding, if the party having the interest which is likely to be so affected is 
not represented by any pleader.]  
11. Conduct of suit. —The Court may give the conduct  of 3[a suit] to such persons as it deems proper.  
12. Appearance of one of several plaintiffs or defendants for others. —(1) Where there are more 
plaintiffs than one , any one or more of them may be authorized by any other of them to appear , plead or 
act for  such other in any proceeding; and in like manner, where there are more defendants than one , any 
one or more of them may be authorized by any other of them to appear , plead or act for such other in any 
proceeding.  
(2) The authority shall be in writing sign ed by the party giving it and shall be filed in Court.  
13. Objections as to non -joinder or misjoinder. —All objections on the ground of non -joinder or 
misjoinder of parties shall be taken at the earliest possible oppo rtunity and , in all cases where issues a re 
settled , at or before such settlement, unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen , and any such 
objection not so taken shall be deemed to have been waived.  
______  
ORDER II  
Frame of suit 
1. Fra me of suit. —Every suit shall as far as practicabl e be framed so as to afford ground for final 
decision upon the subjects in dispute and to prevent further litigation concerning them.  
2. Suit to include the whole claim. —(1) Every suit shall include the whole of the claim which the 
plaintiff is entitled to  make in r espect of the cause of action; but a plaintiff may relinquish and portion of 
his claim in order to bring the suit within the jurisdiction of any Court.  
(2) Relinquishment of part of claim. —Where  a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentio nally  
relinquishes, any portion of his claim, he shall not afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or 
relinquished.  
(3) Omission to sue for one of several reliefs. —A person entitled to more than one relief in respect 
of the same cause of action  may sue for all or any of such reliefs; but if he omits, except with the leave of 
the Court, to sue for all such reliefs, he shall not afterwards sue for any relief so omitted.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this rule an obligation and a collateral secu rity for its performance 
and successive claims arising under the same obligation shall be deemed respectively to constitute but one 
cause of action.  
 
                                                      
1. See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), s. 21.  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 52 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
3. Subs . by s. 52, ibid., for “the suit” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  86 
 Illustration  
A lets a house to B at a yearly of rent Rs. 1 ,200. The rent for the whole of the years 1905, 1906 and 1907 is due and unpaid. 
A sues B in 1908 only for the rent due for 1906. A shall not afterwards sue B for the rent due for 1905 or 1907.  
3. Joinder of causes of action. —(1) Save as otherwise provided, a plaintiff may unite in the same 
suit several  causes of action against the same defendant, or the same defendants jointly; and any plaintiffs 
having causes of action in which they are jointly interested against the same defendant or the same 
defendants jointly may unite such causes of action in the s ame suit.  
(2) Where causes of action are united, the jurisdiction of the Court as regards the suit shall depend on 
the amount or value of the aggregate subject -matters at the date of instituting the suit.  
4. Only certain claims to be joined for recovery of  immovable property. —No cause of action 
shall, unless with the leave of the Court, be joined with a suit for the recovery of immovable property, 
except —  
(a) claims for mesne profits  or arrears of rent in respect of the property claimed or any part 
thereof ; 
(b) claims for damages for breach of any contract under which the property or any part thereof is 
held; and  
(c) claims in which the relief sought is based on the same cause of action:  
Provided that nothing in this rule shall be deemed to prevent any part y in a suit for foreclosure or 
redemption from asking to be put into possession of the mortgaged property.  
5. Claims by or against executor, administrator or heir. —No claim by or against an executor, 
administrator or heir, as such, shall be joined with cla ims by or against him personally, unless the last 
mentioned claims are alleged to arise with reference to the estate in respect of which the plaintiff or defendant 
sues or is sued as executor, administrator or heir, or are such as he was entitled to, or li able for, joint ly with 
the deceased person whom he represents.  
1[6. Power of Court to order separate trials. —Where  it appears to the Court that the joinder of 
causes of action in one suit may embarrass or delay the trial or is otherwi se inconvenient, the C ourt may 
order separate trials or make such other order as may be expedient in the interests of justice.]  
7. Objections as to misjoinder. —All objections on the ground of misjoinder of causes of action shall 
be taken at the earliest possible opportunity and , in all cases where issues are settled, at or before such 
settlement , unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen, and any such objection not so taken 
shall be deemed to have been waived.    
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of  the First  Schedule  Order  II.— In the First Schedule to the principal Act 
(hereinafter in this  Chapter  referred  to as the First  Schedule),  in Order  II, in rule 2 — 
(a) the existing explanation shall be numbered as Explanation I,  and after Explanation I, 
as so numbere d the following explanation  II, shall  be inserted,  namely  :— 
“Explanation  II— For the purpose  of this rule a claim  for ejectment  of the defendant  from  
immovable  property  let out to him and a claim  for money  due  from  him  on account  of  rent  or 
compens ation  for use and occupation  of that property,  shall  be deemed  to be claims  in respect  
of distinct  causes  of action.”;  
(b) for the  illustration,  the  following  illustration  shall  be substituted,  namely  :— 
“Illustration — A lets immovable property to B at a yearly rent.  The rent for the whole of the 
years 1905, 1906 and 1907 is due and  unpaid,  and the  tenancy  is  determined before A sues Bin 
1908, only  for the  rent due for 1906. A may afterwards  sue B for ejectment but  not for the rent 
due for 1905  or 1907.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 4]  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 53, for rule 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  87 
 ______  
ORDER II I 
Recognized  Agents and Pleaders  
1. Appearances, etc., may be in person, by recognized agent or by pleader. —Any appearance, 
application or act in or to any Court, required or authorized by law to be made or done by a party in such Court, 
may, except where otherwise expressly provided by any law for the time being in force, be made or done by the  
party in person, or by his recognized agent, or by a pleader  1[appearing, applying or acting, as the case may be,] 
on his behalf :  
Provided that any such appearance shall, if the Court so directs, be made by the party in person.  
2. Recogni sed agents. —The recogni sed agents of parties by whom such appearances, applications and 
acts may be made or done a re—  
(a) persons holding powers -of-attorney, authori sing them to make and do such appearances, 
applications and acts on behalf of such parties;  
(b) persons carrying on trade or business for and in the names of parties not resident within the 
local limits o f the jurisdiction of the Court within which limits the appearance, application or act is 
made or done, in matters connected with such trade or business only, where no other agent is 
expressly authori sed to make and do such appearances, applications and ac ts. 
3. Service of process on recogni sed agent. —(1) Process es served on the recogni sed agent of a party 
shall be as effectual as if the same had been served on the party in person, unless the Court otherwise 
directs.  
(2) The provisions for the service of pr ocess on a party to a suit shall apply to the service of process 
on his recogni sed agent.  
2[4. Appointment of pleader. —(1) No pleader shall act for any person in any Court, unless he has been 
appointed for the purpose by such person by a document in writin g signed by such person or by his recogni sed 
agent or by some other person du ly authori sed by or under a power -of-attorney to make such appointment. 
(2) Every such appointment shall be 3[filed in Court and shall, for the purposes of sub -rule (1), be] 
deeme d to be in force until determined with the leave of the Court by a writing signed by the client or the 
pleader , as the case may be, and filed in Court, or until the client or the pleader dies, or until all 
proceedings in the suit are ended so far as regard s the client.  
4[Explanation.  —For the purposes of this sub -rule, the following shall be deemed to be proceedings in 
the suit, —  
(a) an application for the review of decree or order in the suit,  
(b) an application under section 144 or under section 152 of t his Code, in relation to any decree or 
order made in the suit , 
(c) an appeal from any decree or order in the suit, and  
(d) any application or act for the purpose of obtaining copies of documents or return of 
documents produced or filed in the suit or of ob taining refund of moneys paid into the Court in 
connection with the suit.]  
5[(3) Nothing in sub -rule (2) shall be construed —  
(a) as extending, as between the pleader and his client, the duration for which the pleader is 
engaged, or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1926, s. 2, for “duly appointed to act”.  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1926 , s. 2, for rule 4.  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976,  s. 54, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by s. 54, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 54, ibid., for sub -rule ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  88 
 (b) as authorising serv ice on the pleader of any notice or document issued by any Court other than 
the Court for which the pleader was engaged, except where such service was expressly agreed to by 
the client in the document referred to in sub -rule ( 1).] 
(4) The High Court may, b y general order, direct that, where the person by whom a pleader is appointed  
is unable to write his name, his mark upon the document appointing the pleader shall be attested by such 
person and in such manner as may be specified by the order.  
(5) No pleade r who has been engaged for the purpose of pleading only shall plead on behalf of any 
party, unless he has filed in court a memorandum of appearance signed by himself and stating —  
(a) the names of the parties to the suit,  
(b) the name of the party for whom  he appears, and  
(c) the name of the person by whom he is authorised to appear:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall apply to any pleader engaged to plead on behalf of any 
party by any other pleader who has been duly appointed to act in Court on be half of such party.]  
5. Service of process on pleader. —1[Any process served on the pleader who has been duly 
appointed to act in Court for any party] or left at the office or ordinary residence of such pleader, and 
whether the same is for the personal appe arance of the party or not, shall be presumed to be duly 
communicated and made known to the party whom the pleader represents, and, unless the Court 
otherwise directs, shall be as effectual for all purposes as if the same had been given to or served on the  
party in person.  
6. Agent to accept service. —(1) Besides the recogni sed agents described in rule 2 any person 
residing within the jurisdiction of the Court may be appointed an agent to accept service of process.  
(2) Appointment to be in writing and to be filed in Court. —Such  appointment may be special or 
general and shall be made by an instrument in writing signed by the principal, and such instrument or, if 
the appointment is general, a certified copy thereof shall be filed in Court.  
2[(3) The Court may, at any stage of the suit, order any party to the suit not having a recognised agent 
residing within the jurisdiction of the Court, or a pleader who has been duly appointed to act in the Court 
on his behalf, to appoint, within a specified time, an agent res iding within the jurisdiction of the Court to 
accept service of the process on his behalf.] 
______  
ORDER IV  
Institution of suits  
1. Suit to be commenced by plaint. —(1) Every suit shall be instituted by presenting 3[plaint in 
duplicate to the Court] or such  officer as it appoints in this behalf.  
(2) Every plaint shall comply with the rules contained in Orders VI and VII, so far as they are 
applicable.  
4[(3) The plaint shall not be deemed to be duly instituted unless it complies with the requirements 
specifie d in sub -rules ( 1) and (2)]. 
2. Register of suits. —The Court shall cause the particulars of every suit to be entered in a book to be 
kept for the purpose and called the register of civil suits. Such entries shall be numbered  in every year 
according to the order in which the plaints are admitted.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 54, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 54, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 14, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  89 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
 
Insertion of      Order  IV-A.—In the First  Schedule,  after  Order  IV, the following  Order  shall  be 
inserted , namely  :— 
“ORDER  IV-A 
CONSOLIDATION  OF CASES  
1. Consolidation  of suits  and proceedings — When  two  or  more  suits  or  proceedings  are  
pending  in  the  same  court,  and  the  court  is of opinion  that it is expedient  in the interest  of 
justice,  it may by order  direct  their  joint  trial,  whereupon  all  such  suits  and proceedings  may  be  
decided upon the  evidence  in all or any  such suits  or proceedings.  ” 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 5]  
Amendment  of Order  VI.— In the First Schedule, in Order VI, in rule 15, in sub -rule (1),  for the 
words “at the foot”, the following words shall be substituted,  namely  :— 
“on oath administered  by an officer  empowered  under  section  139 of the Code,”.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 6]  
______  
ORDER V  
Issue and service of summons  
Issue of Summons  
1. Summons. —1[(1) When a suit has be en duly instituted, a summons may be issued to the defendant 
to appear and answer the claim and to file the written statement of his defence, if any, within thirty days 
from the date of service of summons on that defendant:  
Provided that no such  summons sh all be issued when a defendant has appeared at the presentation of 
plaint and admitted the plaintiff ’s claim:  
*[Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of 
thirty days, he shall be allowed to file  the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the 
Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but 
which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of service of sum mons and on expiry 
of one hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to 
file the written statement and the Court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.]  
(2) A defendant to whom a sum mons has been issued under sub -rule (1) may appear —  
(a) in person, or  
(b) by a pleader duly instructed and able to answer all material questions relating to the suit, or  
(c) by a pleader accompan ied by some person able to answer all such questions.  
(3) Every such summons shall be signed by the Judge or such officer as he appoints, and shall be 
sealed with the seal of the Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) .— 
In Order V, in Rule 1, for the second proviso, substitute the following provi so, namely; - 
Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of 
thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 6, for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified  value only by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-
2015).  90 
 court, for reasons to be recor ded in writing and on payment of such costs as the court deems fit, but which 
shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons and on expiry of one 
hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant sh all forfeit the right to file the 
written statement and the court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record . 
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
1[2. Copy of plaint annexed to summons. —Every  summon shall be accompan ied by a copy of the 
plaint.] 
3. Court  may order defendant or plaintiff to appear in person. —(1) Where the court sees  reason 
to require the personal appearance of the defendant, the summons shall order him to appear in person in 
Court on the day therein specified.  
(2) Where the Court sees reas on to require the personal appearance of the plaintiff on the same day, it 
shall make an order for such appearance.  
4. No party to be ordered to appear in person unless resident within certain limits. —No party 
shall be ordered to appear in person unless he  resides —  
(a) within the local limits of the Court ’s ordinary original jurisdiction, or  
(b) without such limits but at place less than fifty or (where there is railway or steamer 
communication or other established public conveyance for five -sixths of the distance between the 
place where he resides and the place where the Court is situate) less than two hundred miles distance 
from the court -house.  
5. Summons to be either to settle issues or for final disposal. —The Court shall determine, at the 
time of issu ing the summons, whether it shall be for the settlement of issues only, or for the final disposal 
of the suit; and the summons shall contain a direction accordingly:  
Provided that, in every suit heard by a Court of Small Causes, the summons shall be for th e final 
disposal of the suit.  
6. Fixing day for appearance of defendant. —The day 2[under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 1] shall be 
fixed with reference to the current business of the Court, the place of residence of the defendant and the 
time necessary for the serv ice of the summons; and the day shall be so fixed as to allow the defendant 
sufficient time to enable him to appear and answer on such day.  
7. Summons to order defendant to produce documents relied on by him. —The summons to 
appea r and answer shall order th e defendant to produce 3[all documents or copies thereof specified in 
rule lA of Order VIII] in his possession or power upon which he intends to rely in support of his case.  
8. On issue of summons for final disposal, defendant to be directed to produce his  witnesses .—Where 
the summons is for the final disposal of the suit, it shall also direct the defendant to produce, on the day fixed 
for his appearance, all witnesses upon whose evidence he intends to rely in support of his case.  
Service of summons  
4[9. De livery of summons by Court. —(1) Where the defendant resides within the jurisdiction of the 
Court in which the suit is instituted, or has an agent resident within that jurisdiction who is empowered to 
accept the service of the summons, the summons shall, un less the Court otherwise directs, be delivered or sent 
either to the proper officer to be served by him or one of his subordinates or to such courier services as are 
approved by the Court.  
 (2) The proper officer may be an officer of a Court other than tha t in which the suit is instituted, and, where 
he is such an officer, the summons may be sent to him in such manner as the Court may direct.  
(3) The services of summons may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by registered post 
acknowledgme nt due, addressed to the defendant or his agent empowered to accept the service or by speed 
post or by such courier services as are approved by the High Court or by the Court referred to in sub -rule ( 1) or 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 15, for sub -rule ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by  Act 22 of 2002,  s. 15, for the appearance of the defendant   (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for all documents  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  91 
 by any other means of transmission of documents (i ncluding fax message or electronic mail service) provided 
by the rules made by the High Court:  
Provided that the service of summons under this sub -rule shall be made at the expenses of the plaintiff.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rule ( 1), where a defendant resides outside the jurisdiction 
of the Court in which the suit is instituted, and the Court directs that the service of summons on that defendant 
may be made by such mode of service of summons as is referred to in sub -rule ( 3) (except by  registered post 
acknowledgment due), the provisions of rule 21 shall not apply.  
(5) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the defendant or his agent is 
received by the Court or postal article containing the summons is rece ived back by the Court with an 
endorsement purporting to have been made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by the courier 
service to the effect that the defendant or his agent had refused to take delivery of the postal article containing 
the summons or had refused to accept the summons by any other means specified in sub -rule (3) when 
tendered or transmitted to him, the Court issuing the summons shall declare that the summons had been duly 
served on the defendant:  
Provided that where the summo ns was properly addressed, pre -paid and duly sent by registered post 
acknowledgment due, the declaration referred to in this sub -rule shall be made notwithstanding the fact that the 
acknowledgment having been lost or mislaid, or for any other reason, has n ot been received by the Court 
within thirty days from the date of issue of summons.  
(6) The High Court or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of courier agencies for 
the purposes of sub -rule (1). 
9A. Summons given to the plaintiff  for service. —(1) The Court may, in addition to the service of 
summons under rule 9, on the application of the plaintiff for the issue of a summons for the appearance of the 
defendant, permit such plaintiff to effect service of such summons on such defenda nt and shall, in such a case, 
deliver the summons to such plaintiff for service.  
(2) The service of such summons shall be effected by or on behalf of such plaintiff by delivering or 
tendering to the defendant personally a copy thereof signed by the Judge o r such officer of the Court as he may 
appoint in this behalf and sealed with the seal of the Court or by such mode of service as is referred to in                  
sub-rule (3) of rule 9.  
(3) The provisions of rules 16 and 18 shall apply to a summons perso nally served under this rule as if the 
person effecting service were a serving officer.  
(4) If such summons, when tendered, is refused or if the person served refuses to sign an acknowledgment of 
service or for any reason such summons cannot be served pers onally, the Court shall , on the application of the party, 
re-issue such summons to be served by the Court in the same manner as a summons to a defendant.]  
10. Mode of service. —Service of the summons shall be made by delivering or tendering a copy thereof s igned 
by the Judge or such officer as he appoints in this behalf, and sealed with the seal of the Court.  
11. Service on several defendants. —Save as otherwise prescribed, where there are more defendants 
than one, service of the summons shall be made on each  defendant.  
12. Service to be on defendant in person when practicable, or on his agent.  —Wherever it is 
practicable , service shall be made on the defendant in person, unless he has an agent empowered to accept 
service, in which case service on such agent s hall be sufficient.  
13. Service on agent by whom defendant carries on business. —(1) In a suit relating to any 
business or work against a person who does not reside within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the 
Court from which the summons is issued, s ervice on any manager or agent, who, at the time of service, 
personally carries on such business or work for such person within such limits, shall be deemed good 
service.  
(2) For the purpose of this rule the master of a ship shall be deemed to be the agent  of the owner or 
charter er. 
14. Service on agent in charge in suits for immovable property. —Where in a suit to obtain relief 
respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property, service cannot be made on the defendant 92 
 in person, and the defendant has no agent empowered to accept the service, it may be made on any agent 
of the defendant in charge of the property.  
1[15. Where service may be on an adult member of defendant's family. — Where in any suit the 
defendant is absent from his residence at the time when the service of summons is sought to be effected 
on his at his residence and there is no likelihood of his being found at the residence within a reasonable 
time and he has no agent empowered to accept service of the summons on his behalf, service may be 
made on any adult member of the family, whether male or female, who is residing with him.  
Explanation.  —A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this rule.]  
16. Person served to sign acknowledgment. —Where the serving officer del ivers or tenders a copy 
of the summons to the defendant personally, or to an agent or other person on his behalf, he shall require 
the signature of the person to whom the copy is so delivered or tendered to an acknowledgment of service 
endorsed on the orig inal summons.  
17. Procedure when defendant refuses to accept service, or cannot be found. —Where the 
defendant or his agent or such other person as aforesaid refuses to sign the acknowledgment, or where the 
serving officer, after using all due and reasonabl e diligence, cannot find the defendant , 2[who is absent 
from his residence at the time when service is sought to be effected on him at his residence and there is no 
likelihood of his being found at the residence within a reasonable time]  and there is no a gent empowered 
to accept service of the summons on his behalf, nor any other person on whom service can be made, the 
serving officer shall affix a copy of the summons on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the 
house in which the defendant ordi narily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain, and 
shall then return the original to the Court from which it was issued, with a report endorsed thereon or 
annexed thereto stating that he has so affixed the copy, the circumstances under  which he did so, and the 
name and address of the person (if any) by whom the house was identified and in whose presence the 
copy was affixed.  
18. Endorsement of time and manner of service. —The serving officer shall, in all cases in which 
the summons has b een served under rule 16, endorse or annex, or cause to be endorsed or annexed, on or 
to the original summons, a return stating the time when and the manner in which the summons was 
served, and the name and address of the person (if any) identifying the pe rson served and witnessing the 
delivery or tender of the summons.  
19. Examination of serving officer. —Where a summons is returned under rule 17, the Court shall, if the 
return under that rule has not been verified by the affidavit of the serving officer, a nd may, if it has been so 
verified, examine the serving officer on oath, or cause him to be so examined by another Court, touching his  
 
proceedings, and may make such further enquiry in the matter as it thinks fit; and shall either declare that 
the summons  has been duly served or order such service as it thinks fit.  
19A.  [Simultaneous issue of summons for service by post in addition to personal service .] Omitted by 
the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act, 1999 (46 of 1999 ), s. 15 (w.e.f . 1-7-2002).    
20. Substituted service. —(1) Where the Court is satisfied that there is reason to believe that the 
defendant is keeping out of the way for the purpose of avoiding service, or that for any other reason the 
summons cannot be served in the ordinary way, the Cou rt shall order the summons to be served by 
affixing a copy thereof in some conspicuous place in the Court -house, and also upon some conspicuous 
part of the house (if any) in which the defendant is known to have last resided  or carried on business or 
person ally worked for gain, or in such other manner as the Court thinks fit.  
3[(1A) Where the Court acting under sub -rule ( 1) orders service by an advertisement in a newspaper, 
the newspaper shall be a daily newspaper circulating in the locality in which the def endant is last known 
to have actually and voluntarily resided, carried on business or personally worked for gain.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 55, for rule 15 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 55, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 55 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   93 
 (2) Effect of substituted service. —Service substituted by order of the Court shall be as effectual as if 
it had been made on the defendant pe rsonally.  
(3) Where service substituted, time for appearance to be fixed. —Where service is substituted by 
order of the Court, the Court shall fix such time for the appearance of the defendant as the case may 
require.  
1[20A.  Service of summons by post. ] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act, 1976 
(104 of 1976) , s. 55 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977)]. 
21. Service of summons where defendant resides within jurisdiction of another Court. —A 
summons may  be sent by the Court by which it is issued, whether within or  without the State, either by 
one of its officers 2[or by post or by such courier service as may be approved by the High Court, by fax 
message or by Electronic Mail service or by any other means as may be provided by the rules made by 
the High Court] to an y Court (not being the High Court) having jurisdiction in the place where the 
defendant resides.  
22. Service within presidency  towns of summons issued by Courts outside. —Where a summons 
issued by any Court established beyond the limits of the towns of Calc utta, Madras 3[and Bombay] is to 
be served within any such limits, it shall be sent to the Court of Small Causes within whose jurisdiction it 
is to be served.  
23. Duty of Court to which summons is sent. —The Court to which a summons is sent under rule 21 or  
rule 22 shall, upon receipt thereof, proceed as if it had been issued by such Court and shall then return the 
summons to the Court of issue, together with the record (if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto.  
24. Service on defendant in prison. —Wher e the defendant is confined in a prison, the summons 
shall be delivered or sent 3[or by post or by such courier service as may be approved by the High Court, 
by fax message or by Electronic Mail service or by any other means as may be provided by the rules  
made by the High Court] to the officer in charge of the prison for service on the defendant.  
25. Service where defendant resides out of India and has no agent. —Where the defendant resides 
out of 4[India] and has no agent in 5[India] empowered to accept se rvice, the summons shall be addressed 
to the defendant at the place where he is residing and sent to him 3[or by post or by such courier service as 
may be approved by the High Court, by fax message or by Electronic Mail service or by any other means 
as may  be provided by the rules made by the High Court], if there is postal communication between such 
place and the place where the Court is situate:  
5[Provided that where any such defendant  6[resides in Bangladesh or Pakistan], the summons, 
together  with a cop y thereof, may be sent for service on the defendant, to any Court in that country (not 
being the High Court) having jurisdiction in the place where the defendant resides :  
Provided further that where any such defendant is a public officer 7[in Bangladesh o r Pakistan (not 
belonging to the Bangladesh or, as the case may be, Pakistan military, naval or air forces)] or is a servant 
of a railway company or local authority in that country, the summons, together with a copy thereof, may  
be sent for service on the defendant, to such officer or authority in that country as the Central Government 
may by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.]  
8[26. Service in foreign territory through Political Agent or Court. —Where —  
(a) in the exercise of any foreign jurisdiction vested in the Central Government, a Political Agent 
has been appointed, or a Court has been established or continued, with power to serve a summons, 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) .  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Bombay and Rangoon”.  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the State”.   
5. Ins. by Act 19 of  1951, s. 2.  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 53, for “resides in Pakistan,” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
8. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for rule 26 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  94 
 issued by a Court under this Code, in any foreign territory in which the defendant act ually and 
voluntarily resides, carries on business or personally works for gain, or  
(b) the Central Government has, by notification in the Official Gazette, declared in respect of 
any Court situate in any such territory and not established or continued in the exercise of any such 
jurisdiction as aforesaid, that service by such Court of any summons issued by a Court under this 
Code shall be deemed to be valid service,  
the summons may be sent to such Political Agent or Court, by post, or otherwise, or if so d irected by the 
Central Government, through the Ministry of that Government dealing with foreign affairs, or in such 
other manner as may be specified by the Central Government for the purpose of being served upon the 
defendant; and, if the Political Agent o r Court returns the summons with an endorsement purporting to 
have been made by such Political Agent or by the Judge or other officer of the Court to the effect that the 
summons has been served on the defendant in the manner hereinbefore directed, such end orsement shall 
be deemed to be evidence of service.  
26A. Summonses to be sent to officers to foreign countries. —Where  the Cen tral Government has, by 
notification in the Official Gazette , declared in respect of any foreign territory that summonses to be ser ved 
on defendants actually and voluntarily residing or carrying on business or personally working for gain in that 
foreign territory may be sent to an officer of the Government of the foreign territory specified by the Central 
Government , the summonses may  be sent to such officer , through the Ministry of the Government of India 
dealing with foreign affairs or in such other manner as may be specified by the Central Government; and if 
such officer returns any such summons with an endorsement purporting to hav e been made by him that the 
summons has been served on the defendant , such endorsement shall be deemed to be evidence of service].  
27. Service on civil public officer or on servant of railway company or local authority. —Where 
the defendant is a public offi cer (not belonging  to the 1[the Indians ] military 2[naval or air] forces  3***), 
or is the servant of a railway company or local authority , the Court may , if it appears to it that the 
summons may be most conveniently so served , send it for service on the de fendant to the head of the 
office in which he is employed , together with a copy to be retained by the defendant.  
28. Service on soldiers, sailors or airmen. —Where  the defendant is a soldier, 4[sailor] 5[or airman], 
the Court shall send the summons for serv ice to his commanding officer together with a copy to be 
retained by the defendant.  
29. Duty of person to whom summons is delivered or sent for service. —(1) Where a summons is 
delivered or sent to any person for service under rule 24, rule 27 or rule 28, s uch person shall be bound to 
serve it if possible, and to return it under his signature, with the written acknowledgment of the defendant , 
and such signature shall be deemed to be evidence of service.  
(2) Where from any cause service is impossible, the sum mons shall be returned to the Court with a 
full statement of such cause and of the steps taken to procure service, and such statement shall be deemed 
to be evidence of non -service.  
30. Substitution of letter for summons. — (1) The Court may, notwithstanding  anything hereinbefore 
contained, substitute for a summons a letter signed by the Judge or such officer as he may appoint in this behalf, 
where the defendant is, in the opinion of the Court, of a rank entitling him to such mark of consideration.  
(2) A lett er substituted under sub -rule ( 1) shall contain all the particulars required to be stated in a 
summons, and, subject to the provisions of sub -rule (3), shall be treated in all respects as a summons.  
(3) A letter so substituted may be sent to the defend ant by post or by a special messenger selected by 
the Court, or in any other manner which the Court thinks fit; and, where the defendant has an agent 
empowered to accept service, the letter may be delivered or sent to such agent.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “his Majes ty’s”.  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “or naval”.  
3. The words “or His Majesty’s Indian Marine Service” omitted by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
4. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule  ibid. 
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and t he First Sch edule . 95 
 ______  
ORDER VI  
Pleadings ge nerally  
1. Pleading. —“Pleading ” shall mean plaint or written statement.  
1[2. Pleading to state material facts and not evidence. —(1) Every pleading shall contain, and 
contain only, a statement in a concise form of the material facts on which the party plead ing relies for his 
claim or defence , as the case may be, but not the evidence by which they are to be proved.  
(2) Every pleading shall, when necessary, be divided  into paragraphs, numbered consecutively, each 
allegation being, so far as is convenient, cont ained in a separate paragraph.  
(3) Dates, sums and numbers shall be expressed in a pleading in figures as well as in words.]  
3. Forms of pleading. —The forms in Appendix A when applicable, and where they are not 
applicable forms of the like character, as ne arly as may be, shall be used for all pleadings.  
*[3A. Forms of pleading in Commercial Courts .––In a commercial dispute, where forms of 
pleadings have been prescribed under the High Court Rules or Practice Directions made for the purposes 
of such commercia l disputes, pleadings shall be in such forms.]  
4. Particulars to be given where necessary. —In all cases in which the party pleading relies on any 
misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful default, or undue influence, and in all other cases in which  
particulars may be necessary beyond such as are exemplified in the forms aforesaid, particulars (with 
dates and items if necessary) shall be stated in the pleading.  
5. [Further and better statement, or particulars .] Omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 1999 (46 of 1999), s. 16 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002 ). 
6. Condition precedent . —Any condition precedent, the performance or occurrence of which is intended 
to be contested, shall be distinctly specified in his pleading by the plaintiff or defendant , as the case may be; 
and, subject thereto, an averment of the performance or occurrence of all conditions precedent necessary for 
the case of the plaintiff or defendant shall be implied in his pleading.  
7. Departure. —No pleading shall, except by way of amen dment, raise any new ground of claim or 
contain any allegation of fact inconsistent with the previous pleadings of the party pleading the same.  
8. Denial of contract. —Where  a contract is alleged in any pleading, a bare denial of the same by the 
opposite pa rty shall be construed only as a denial in fact of the express contract alleged or of the matters of fact 
from which the same may be implied, and not as a denial of the legality or sufficiency in law of such contract.  
9.  Effect of document to be stated. —Wherever  the contents of any document are material, it shall be 
sufficient in any pleading to state the effect thereof as briefly as possible, without setting out the whole or 
any part thereof, unless the precise words of the document or any part thereof ar e material.  
10. Malice, knowledge, etc. —Wherever  it is material to allege malice, fradulent intention, knowledge 
or other condition of the mind of any person, it shall be sufficient to allege the same as a fact without 
setting out the circumstances from wh ich the same is to be inferred.  
11. Notice. —Wherever  it is material to allege notice to any person of any fact, matter or thing, it shall 
be sufficient to allege such notice as a fact, unless the form or the precise terms of such notice, or the 
circumstanc es from which such notice is to be inferred , are material.  
12. Implied contract, or relation. —Whe never any contract or any relation between any persons is to 
be implied from a series of letters or conversations or otherwise from a number of circumstances, it shall 
be sufficient to allege such contract or relation as a fact, and to refer generally to such letters, 
conversations or circumstances without setting them out in detail. And if in such case the person so 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 56, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
* Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 96 
 pleading desires to rely in the alternative u pon more contracts or relations than one as to be implied from 
such circumstances, he may state the same in the alternative.  
13. Presumptions of law. —Neither  party need in any pleading allege any matter of fact which the 
law presumes in his favour or as to  which the burden of proof lies upon the other side unless the same has 
first been specifically denied (e.g., consideration for a bill  of exchange where the plaintiff sues only on 
the bill and not for the consideration as a substantive ground of claim).  
14. Pleading to be signed. —Every  pleading shall be signed by the party and his pleader ( if any): 
Provided that where a party pleading is, by reason of absence or for other good cause, unable to sign the 
pleading, it may be signed by any person duly authori zed by him to sign the same or to sue or defend on 
his behalf  
1[14A. Address for service of notice. —(1) Every pleading, when filed by a party, shall be accompanied 
by a statement in the prescribed form, signed as provided in rule 14, regarding the address of  the party.  
(2) Such address may, from time to time, be changed by lodging in Court a form duly filled up and 
stating the new address of the party and accompanied by a verified petition.  
(3) The address furnished in the statement made under sub -rule ( 1) shall be called the “registered 
address ” of the party, and shall, until duly changed as aforesaid, be deemed to be the address of the party 
for the purpose of service of all processes in the suit or in any appeal from any decree or order therein 
made and for  the purpose of execution, and shall hold good, subject as aforesaid, for a period of two years 
after the final determination of the cause or matter.  
(4) Service of any process may be effected upon a party at his registered address in all respects as 
thoug h such party resided thereat.  
(5) Where the registered address of a party is discovered by the Court to be incomplete. false or 
fictitious, the Court may, either on its own motion, or on the application of any party , order —  
(a) in the case where such regi stered address was furnished by a plaintiff, stay of the suit , or 
(b) in the case where such registered address was furnished by a defendant, his defence be 
struck out and he be placed in the same position as if he had not  put up any defence . 
(6) Where a s uit is stayed or a defence is struck out under sub -rule ( 5), the plaintiff or, as the case may be, 
the defendant may, after furnishing his true address, apply to the Court for an order to set aside the order of 
stay or, as the case may be, the order striki ng out the defence.  
(7) The Court, if satisfied that the party was prevented by any sufficient cause from filing the true address 
at the proper time, shall set aside the order of stay or order striking out the defence, on such terms as to costs or 
otherwis e as it thinks fit and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit or defence , as the case may be.  
(8) Nothing in this rule shall prevent the Court from directing the service of a process at any other address, 
if, for any reason, it thinks fit to do s o.] 
15. Verification of pleadings. —(1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, 
every pleading shall be v erified at the foot by the party or by one of the parties pleading or by some other 
person proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case.  
(2) The person verifying shall specify, by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the pleading, what he 
verifies of his own knowledge and what he verifies upon information received and believed to be true . 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 56 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  97 
 (3) The verification shall be signed by the person making it and shall state the date on which and the place 
at which it was signed.  
1[(4) The person verifying the pleading shall also furnish an affidavit in support of his pleadings.  
*[15A.  Verification of pleadings in a commercial dispute .— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
Rule 15, every pleading in a commercial dispute shall be verified by an affidavit in the manner and form 
prescribed in the Appendix to this Schedule.  
(2) An affidavit under s ub-rule ( 1) above shall be signed by the party or by one of the parties to the 
proceedings, or by any other person on behalf of such party or parties who is proved to the satisfaction of the 
Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case and who is duly  authorised by such party or parties.  
(3) Where a pleading is amended, the amendments must be verified in the form and manner referred to in 
sub-rule ( 1) unless the Court orders otherwise.  
(4) Where a pleading is not verified in the manner provided under sub-rule ( 1), the party shall not be 
permitted to rely on such pleading as evidence or any of the matters set out therein.  
(5) The Court may strike out a pleading which is not verified by a Statement of Truth, namely, the 
affidavit set out in the Appendix  to this Schedule.]  
2[16. Striking out pleadings. —The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order to be struck out or 
amended any matter in any pleading —  
(a) which may be unnecessary, scandalous, frivolous or vexatious, of  
(b) which may tend to prejud ice, embarrass or delay the fair trail of the suit, or  
(c) which is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court.]  
3[17. Amendment of pleadings. —The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow either party to 
alter or amend his pleadings in such mann er and on such terms as may be just, and all such amendments shall 
be made as may be necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in controversy between the 
parties: 
Provided that no application for amendment shall be allowed after the trial  has commenced, unless the 
Court comes to the conclusion that in spite of due diligence, the party could not have raised the matter before 
the commencement of trial.  
18. Failure to amend after Order. —If a party who has obtained an order for leave to amend does not 
amend accordingly within the time limited for that purpose by the order, or if no time is thereby limited then 
within fourteen days from the date of the order, he shall not be permitted to amend after the expiration of such 
limited time as aforesa id or of such fourteen days, as the case may be, unless the time is extended by the 
Court.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order VI of  the First  Schedule. — In the First  Schedule  to  the  said  
Code,  in  Order  VI,  in  rule  15, in sub-rule (1), for words,  “on oath administered  by an 
officer  empowered  under  section  137 of the Code,”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 31 of 1978, s. 4]  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).   
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 56, for rule 16 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 7, for rules 17 and 18 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
* Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specif ied value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 98 
 ____  
ORDER VII  
Plaint  
1. Particulars to be contained in plaint. —The plaint shall contain the following particulars: —  
(a) the name of the Court in which the suit is brought;  
 (b) the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff;  
(c) the name, description and place of residence of the defendant, so far as they can be ascertained;  
(d) where the plaintiff or the d efendant is a minor or a person of unsound mind, a statement to that 
effect;  
(e) the facts constituting the cause of action and when it arose;   
(f) the facts showing that the Court has jurisdiction;  
(g) the relief which the plaintiff claims;  
(h) where the  plaintiff has allowed a set -off or relinquished a portion of his claim, the amount so 
allowed , or relinquished; and  
(i) a statement of the value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purposes of jurisdiction and of 
court -fees, so far as the case admit s. 
2. In money suits. —Where the plaintiff seeks the recovery of money, the plaint shall state the precise amount 
claimed :  
But where the plaintiff sues for mesne profits , or for an amount which will be found due to him on taking 
unsettled accounts between him and the defendant, 1[or for movables in the possession of the defendant, or for debts 
of which the value he cannot, after the exercise of reasonable diligence, estimate, the plaint shall state approximately 
the amount or value sued for .] 
*[2A. Where in terest is sought in the suit . — (1) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall contain a 
statement to that effect along with the details set out under sub -rules ( 2) and ( 3).  
(2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether the plaintiff is seeking interest in 
relation to a commercial transaction within the meaning of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure,                            
1908 (5 of 1908) and, furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the terms of a contra ct or under an Act, in 
which case the Act is to be specified in the plaint; or on some other basis and shall state the basis of that.  
(3) Pleadings shall also state — 
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed;  
(b) the date from which it is claimed;  
(c) the date to which it is calculated;  
(d) the total amount of interest claimed to the date of calculation; and  
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after that date. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) ― 
In Order VII, after Rule, insert  the following Rule, namely: - 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 57, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
 99 
 2A. Where interest is sought in the suit .—(1) Where the plaintiff seeks interests, the plaint shall 
contain a statement to that effect along with the details set out under sub -rules (2) and (3).  
(2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether the plaintiff is seeking interest in  
relation to a commercial transaction within the meaning of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 and, furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the terms of a con tract or under an Act, in which 
case the Act is to be specified in the plaint; or on some other basis and shall state the basis of that.  
(3) Pleadings shall also state — 
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed;  
(b) the date from which it is claimed;  
(c) the date to which it is calculated;  
(d) the total amount of interest claimed to the date calculation; and  
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after the date.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notif ication 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
3. Where the subject -matter of the suit is immovable property. —Where  the subject -matter of the suit is 
immovable property, the plaint shall contain a description of the property sufficient to identify it, and, in case such 
property can be identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement or survey, the plaint sh all specify such 
boundaries or numbers.  
4. When plaintiff sues as representative. —Where  the plaintiff sues in a representative character the plaint 
shall show not only that he has an actual existing interest in the subject -matter, but that he has taken the  steps (if 
any) necessary to enable him to institute a suit concerning it.  
5. Defendant ’s interest and liability to be shown. —The plaint shall show that the defendant is or claims to be 
interested in  the subject -matter, and that he is liable to be called u pon to answer the plaintiff ’s demand.  
6. Grounds of exemption from limitation law. —Where  the suit is instituted after the expiration of the period 
prescribed by the law of limitation, the plaint shall show the ground upon which exemption from such law is   
claimed :  
1[Provided that the Court may permit the plaintiff to claim exemption from the law of limitation on any ground 
not set out in the plaint, if such ground is not inconsistent with the grounds set out in the plaint.]  
7. Relief to be specifically sta ted.—Every  plaint shall state specifically the relief which the plaintiff claims 
either simply or in the alternative, and it shall not be necessary to ask for general or other relief which may always 
be given as the Court may think just to the same extent as if it had been asked for. And the same rule shall apply to 
any relief claimed by the defendant in his written statement.  
8. Relief founded on separate grounds. —Where  the plaintiff seeks relief in respect of several distinct claims 
or causes of action fo unded upon separate and distinct grounds, they shall be stated as far as may be separately and 
distinctly.  
2[9. Procedure on admitting plaint. —Where  the Court orders that the summons be served on the defendants in 
the manner provided in rule 9 of Order  V, it will direct the plaintiff to present as many copies of the plaint on 
plain paper as there are defendants within seven days from the date of such order along with requisite fee for 
service of summons on the defendants.]  
310. Return of plaint. —(1) 4[ Subject to the provisions of rule 10A, the plaint shall] at any stage 
of the suit be returned to be presented to the Court in which the suit should have been instituted.  
                                                      
1. The proviso a dded by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 57 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 8, for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. This rule has been applied to suits for the recovery of rent under the Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 (Ben. 6 o f 1908) s. 265.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 57, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  100 
  1[Explanation. — For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that a Court of appeal or  
revision may direct after setting aside the decree passed in a suit, the return of the plaint under this 
sub-rule.]  
(2) Procedure on returning plaint . —On returning a plaint, the Judge shall endorse thereon the 
date of its presentation and return, the nam e of the party presenting it, and a brief statement of the 
reasons for returning it.  
3[10A. Power of Court to fix a date of appearance in the Court where plaint is to be filed 
after its return. —(1) Where, in any suit, after the defendant has appeared, the Court is of opinion 
that the plaint should be returned, it shall, before doing so, intimate its decision to the plaintiff .] 
(2) Where an intimation is given to the plaintiff under sub -rule (1), the plaintiff may make an 
application to thc Court —  
 (a) specifying the Court in which he proposes to present the plaint after its return,  
 (b) praying that the Court may fix a date for the appearance of the parties in the said Court, and  
(c) requesting that the notice of the date so fixed may be given to him and to  the defendant.  
(3) Where an application is made by the plaintiff under sub -rule (2), the Court shall, before 
returning the plaint and notwithstanding that the order for return of plaint was made by it on the 
ground that it has no jurisdiction to try the s uit,—  
(a) fix a date for the appearance of the parties in the Court in which the plaint is proposed to 
be presented , and 
(b) give to the plaintiff and to the defendant notice of such date for appearance.  
(4) Where the notice of the date for appearance is given under sub -rule (3),—  
(a) it shall not be necessary for the Court in which the plaint is presented after its return, to 
serve the defendant with a summons for appearance in the suit, unless that Court, for reasons to be 
recorded, othe rwise directs, a nd 
(b) the said notice shall be deemed to be a summons for the appearance of the defendant in the 
Court in which the plaint is presented on the date so fixed by the Court by which the plaint was 
returned.  
(5) Where the application made by the plaintiff und er sub -rule (2) is allowed by the Court, the 
plaintiff shall not be entitled to appeal against the order returning the plaint.  
10B. Power of appellate Court to transfer suit to the proper Court. — (1) Where, on an 
appeal against an order for the return of p laint, the Court hearing the appeal confirms such order, the 
Court of appeal may, if the plaintiff by an application so desires, while returning the plaint, direct 
plaintiff to file the plaint, subject to the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1 963), in the 
Court in which the suit should have been instituted , (whether such Court is within or without the State 
in which the Court hearing the appeal is situated) , and fix a date for the appearance of the parties in the 
Court in which the plaint is di rected to be filed and when the date is so fixed it shall not be necessary 
for the Court in which the plaint is filed to serve the defendant with the summons for appearance in the 
suit, unless that Court in which the plaint is filed, for reasons to be reco rded, otherwise directs.  
(2) The direction made by the Court under sub -rule (1) shall be without any prejudice to the rights of 
the parties to question the jurisdiction of the Court, in which the plaint is filed, to try the suit.]  
11. Rejection of plaint. — The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases: —  
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  101 
 (b) where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to 
correct the valuation within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so;  
(c) where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the plaint is returned upon paper insufficiently 
stamped, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to supply the requisite stamp -paper within a 
time to be fixed by the  Court, fails to do so;  
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law;  
1[(e) where it is not filed in duplicate;]  
2[(f) where the plaintiff fails to comply with the provisions of rule 9:]  
3[Provided that the time fixed  by the Court for the correction of the valuation or supplying of the 
requisite stamp -paper shall not be extended unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, is satisfied that 
the plaintiff was prevented by any cause of an exceptional nature from correct ing the valuation or 
supplying the requisite stamp -paper, as the case may be, within the time fixed by the Court and that 
refusal to extend such time would cause grave injustice to the plaintiff.]  
12. Procedure on rejecting plaint. —Where  a plaint is reject ed the Judge shall record an order to that 
effect with the reasons for such order.  
13. Where rejection of plaint does not preclude presentation of fresh plaint. —The rejection of 
the plaint on any of the grounds hereinbefore mentioned shall not of its own f orce preclude the plaintiff 
from presenting a fresh plaint in respect of the same cause of action.  
Documents relied on in plaint  
4[14. Production of document on which plaintiff sues or relies. —(1) Where a plaintiff sues upon a 
document or relies upon docum ent in his possession or power in support of his claim, he shall enter such 
documents in a list, and shall produce it in Court when the plaint is presented by him and shall, at the 
same time deliver the document and a copy thereof, to be filed with the pla int. 
(2) Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the plaintiff, he shall, wherever 
possible, state in whose possession or power it is.  
5[(3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the plaintiff when the plaint is presented, or 
to be entered in the list to be added or annexed to the plaint but is not produced or entered accordingly, 
shall not, without the leave of the Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit.]  
(4) Nothing in this rule shall apply  to document produced for the cross -examination of the plaintiffs 
witnesses, or handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.]  
15. [Statement in case of documents not in plaintiff possession or powers .] omitted by Act 46 of 1999 
s. 17 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).  
16. Suits on lost negotiable instruments. —Where the suit is founded upon a negotiable instrument, 
and it is proved that the instrument is lost, and an indemnity is given by the plaintiff , to the satisfaction of 
the Court, against the claims of any o ther person upon such instrument, the Court may pass such decree as 
it would have passed if the plaintiff had produced the instrument in Court when the plaint was presented, 
and had at the same time delivered a copy of the instrument to be filed with the p laint.  
17. Production of shop -book. —(1) Save in so far as is otherwise provided by the Bankers ’ Books Evidence 
Act, 1891 ( XVIII  of 1891), where the document on which the plaintiff sues is an entry in a shop -book or other 
account in his possession or power,  the plaintiff shall produce the book or account at the time of filing the plaint, 
together with a copy of the entry on which he relies.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 8, for sub -clauses (f) and (g) (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).  
3. Added by Act 104 of 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 17, for rule 14 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 8, for sub -rule (3) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  102 
 (2) Original entry to be marked and returned. —The Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall 
forthwith mark the document for the purpose of identification; and, after examining and comparing the copy with 
the original, shall, if it is found correct, certify it to be so and return the book to the plaintiff and cause the copy to b e 
filed.  
18. [Inadmissibility  of document not produced when plaint filed. ] omitted by Act 22 of 2002 , s. 8 (w. e. f. 1-7-
2002).  
______  
ORDER VIII  
1[Written statement,  set-off and counter -claim ] 
2[1.  Written Statement. —The Defendant shall, within thirty days from the date of service o f 
summons on him, present a written statement of his defence:  
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of thirty 
days, he shall be allowed to file the same on such other day, as may be specified by the Co urt, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, but which shall not be later than ninety days from the date of service of 
summons.]  
*[Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of thirty 
days, he shall be allow ed to file the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the Court, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but which shall 
not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of serv ice of summons and on expiry of one 
hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the 
written statement and the Court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.]  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) . — 
In Rule 1, for the proviso thereto, substitute the following proviso, namely, - 
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement with the said period of thirty days, 
he shall be allowed to file the wr itten statement on such other day, as may be specified by the court, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the court deems fit, but which shall not 
be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons an d on expiry of one hundred 
twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written 
statement and the court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  
notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
3[1A. Duty of d efendant to produce documents upon which relief is claimed or relied upon by 
him.—(1) Where the defendant bases his defence upon a document or relies upon any document in his 
possession or power, in support of his defence or claim for set -off or counter -claim, he shall enter such 
document in a list, and shall produce it in Court when the written statement is presented by him and shall, at 
the same time, deliver the document and a copy thereof, to be filed with the written statement.  
(2) Where any such docum ent is not in the possession or power of the defendant, he shall, wherever 
possible, state in whose possession or power it is.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 58, for the former head ing (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 9, for rule 1 (w.e.f 1 -7-2002).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s.18 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  103 
 1[(3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the defendant under this rule, but, is not so 
produced shall not, without  the leave of the Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of 
the suit.]  
(4) Nothing in this rule shall apply to documents — 
(a) produced for the cross -examination of the plaintiff's witnesses, or  
(b) handed over to a witness  merely to re fresh his memory.]  
2.  New facts must be specially pleaded. —The defendant must raise by his pleading all matters which 
show the suit not be maintainable, or that the transaction is either void or voidable in point of law, and all 
such grounds of defence as , if not raised, would be likely to take the opposite party by surprise, or would 
raise issues of fact not arising out of the plaint, as, for instance, fraud, limitation, release, payment, 
performance, or facts showing illegality.  
3. Denial to be specific .—It shall not be sufficient for a defendant in his written statement to deny 
generally the grounds alleged by the plaintiff, but the defendant must deal specifically with each 
allegation of fact of which he does not admit the truth, except damages . 
*[3A. D enial by the defendant in suits before the Commercial Division of the High Court or the 
Commercial Court .— (1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub -rules ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of this 
Rule.  
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state w hich of the allegations in the particulars of 
plaint he denies, which allegations he is unable to admit or deny, but which he requires the plaintiff to 
prove, and which allegations he admits.  
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a plain t, he must state his reasons for doing so 
and if he intends to put forward a different version of events from that given by the plaintiff, he must state 
his own version.  
(4) If the defendant disputes the jurisdiction of the Court he must state the reasons for doing so, and if 
he is able, give his own statement as to which Court ought to have jurisdiction.   
(5) If the defendant disputes the plaintiff’s valuation of the suit, he must state his reasons for doing so, 
and if he is able, give his own statement o f the value of the suit. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) .― 
After Rue 3, insert the following Rule, namely, - 
“3A. Denial by the defendant in suits .—(1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub -rules (2), 
(3), (4) and (5) of this r ule. 
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state which of the allegations in the particulars of 
plaint he denies, which allegations he is unable to admit or deny, but which he requires the plaintiff to 
prove, and which allegations he admits.  
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a plaint, he must state his reasons for doing so 
and if he intends to put forward a different version of events from that given by the plaintiff, he must state 
his own version.  
(4) If the defendant dispu tes the jurisdiction of the court he must state the reasons for doing so, and if 
he is able, give his own statement as to which court ought to have jurisdiction.  
(5) If the defendant disputes the plaintiff valuation of the suit, he must state his reasons for doing so, 
and if he is able, give his own statement of the value of the suit.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorga nisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 9, for sub -rule ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  104 
 4. Evasive -denial. —Where  a defendant denies an allegation of fact in the plaint, he must not do so 
evasively, but answer the point of substance. Thus, if  it is alleged that he received a certain sum of 
money, it shall not be sufficient to deny that he received that particular amount, but he must deny that he 
received that sum or any part thereof, or else set out how much he received. And if an allegation i s made 
with diverse circumstances, it shall not be sufficient to deny it along with those circumstances.  
5. Specific denial .—1[(1)] Every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied specifically or by 
necessary implication, or stated to be not admitted  in the pleading of the defendant, shall be taken to be 
admitted except as against a person under disability:  
Provided that the Court may in its discretion require any fact so admitted to be proved othe rwise than 
by such admission:  
*[Provided further that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied in the manner provided 
under Rule 3A of this Order, shall be taken to be admitted except as against a person under disability.]  
2[(2) Where the defendant has not filed a pleading, it shall be lawful for  the court to pronounce 
judgment on the basis of the facts contained in the plaint, except as against a person under a disability, but 
the Court may, in its discretion, require any such fact to be proved.  
(3) In exercising its discretion under the proviso to sub -rule ( 1) or under sub -rule ( 2), the Court shall 
have due regard to the fact whether the defendant could have, or has, engaged a pleader.  
(4) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, a decree shall be drawn up in accordance 
with such judgme nt and such decree shall bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) .— 
In Rule 5, in sub -rule (1) after first proviso thereto, insert the following proviso, namely: - 
 Provided further, that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied in the manner provided 
under Rue 3 -A of this order, shall be taken to be admitted except as against a person under disability.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptatio n of Central Laws) Order, 20 20, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
6. Particulars of set -off to be given in written statement. —(1) Where in a suit for the recovery of 
money the defendant claims to set -off against the plaintiff's demand any ascertained sum of money legally 
recoverable by him from the plaintiff, not exceeding the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, an d 
both parties fill the same character as they fill in the plaintiff's suit, the defendant may, at the first hearing of 
the suit, but not afterwards unless permitted by the Court, presents a written statement containing the 
particulars of the debt sought t o be set -off. 
(2) Effect of set -off.—The written statement shall have the same effect as a plaint in a cross -suit so as 
to enable the court to pronounce a final judgment in respect both of the original claim and of the set -off: 
but this shall not affect th e lien, upon the amount decreed, of any pleader in respect of the costs payable to 
him under the decree.  
(3) The rules relating to a written statement by a defendant apply to a written statement in answer to a 
claim of set -off. 
Illustrations  
(a) A bequeath s Rs. 2,000 to B and appoints C his executor and residuary legatee. B dies and D takes out adminis tration 
to B's effects, C pays Rs, 1,000 as surety for D; then D sues C for the legacy. C cannot set -off the debt of Rs. 1,000 
against the legacy, for neithe r C nor D fills the same character with respect to the legacy as they fill with respect to 
the payment of the Rs. 1,000.  
(b) A dies intestate and in debt to B. C takes out administration to A ’s effects and B buys part of the effects from C. 
In a suit for t he purchase -money by C against B, the latter cannot set -off the debt against the price, for C fills 
two different characters, one as the vendor to B, in which he sues B, and the other as representative to A.  
(c) A sues B on a bill of exchange. B alleges th at A has wrongfully neglected to insure B's goods and is liable to him in 
compensation which he claims to set -off. The amount not being ascertained cannot be set -off. 
                                                      
1. Rule 5 renumbered as sub -rule (I) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 58 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 58, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a spec ified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  105 
 (d)  A sues B on a bill of exchange for Rs. 500. B holds a judgment against A for Rs. 1,0 00. The two claims being both definite 
pecuniary demands may be set -off. 
(e) A sues B for compensation on account of trespass. B hold a promissory note for Rs. 1,000 from A and claims to set -off that 
amount against any sum that A may recover in the suit. B  may do so, for, as soon as A recovers, both sums are definite 
pecuniary demands.  
(f) A and B sue C for Rs. 1,00 0. C cannot set -off a debt due to him by A alone.  
(g) A sues B and C for Rs. 1,000. B cannot set -off a debt due to him alone by A.  
(h) A owes th e partnership firm of B and C Rs. 1,000. B dies, leaving C surviving. A sues C for a debt for Rs. 1,500 due in his 
separate character. C may set -off the debt of Rs. 1,000.  
1[6A. Counter -claim by defendant. —(1) A defendant in a suit may, in addition to his right of 
plead ing a set -off under rule 6, set up, by way of counter -claim against the claim of the plaintiff, any 
right or claim in respect of a cause of action accruing to the defendant against the plaintiff either before 
or after the filing of the suit but before the defendant has delivered his defence or before the time limited 
for delivering his defence has expired, whether such counter -claim is in the natur e of a claim for 
damages or not:  
Provided that such counter -claim shall not exceed the pecuniary  limits of the jurisdiction of the 
court.  
(2) Such counter -claim shall have the same effect as a cross -suit so as to enable the Court to pro -
nounce a final judgment in the same suit, both on the original claim and on the counter -claim.  
(3) The plaintiff sh all be at liberty to file a written statement in answer to the counter -claim of the 
defendant within such period as may be fixed by the court.  
(4) The counter -claim shall be treated as a plaint and governed by the rules applicable to plaints.  
6B. Counter -claim to be stated. — Where any defendant seeks to rely upon any ground as support -
ing a right of counter -claim, he shall, in his written statement, state specifically that he does so by way of 
counter -claim.  
6C. Exclusion of counter -claim. —Where  a defendant  sets up a counter -claim and the plaintiff con -
tends that the claim thereby raised ought not to be disposed of by way of counter -claim but in an indepen -
dent suit, the plaintiff may, at any time before issues are settled in relation to the counter -claim, a pply to 
the Court for an order that such counter -claim may be excluded, and the Court may, on the hearing of 
such application make such order as it thinks fit.  
6D. Effect of discontinuance of suit. — If in any case in which the defendant sets up a counter claim, 
the suit of the plaintiff is stayed , discontinued or dismissed, the counter -claim may nevertheless be 
proceeded with.  
6E. Default of plaintiff to reply to counter -claim. —If the pla intiff makes default in putting in a 
reply to the counter -claim made b y the defendant, the Court may pronounce judgment against the plain tiff 
in relation to the counter -claim made against him, or make such order in relation to the counter -claim as it 
thinks fit.  
6F. Relief to defendant where counter -claim succeeds. —Where  in any suit a set -off or counter -
claim is established as a defence against the plaintiff ’s claim and any balance is found due to the 
plaintiff or the defendant, as the case may be. the Court may give judgment to the party entitled to 
such balance.  
6G. Rules relating to written statement to apply. —The rules relating to a written statement by a 
defendant shall apply to a written statement filed in answer to a counter -claim.]  
7. Defence or set -off founded upon separate grounds. —Where  the defendant relies upon se veral 
distinct grounds of defence or set -off  1[or counter -claim] founded upon separate and distinct facts, they 
shall be stated, as far as may be, separately and distinctly.  
8. New ground of defence. —Any ground of defence which has arisen after the instit ution of the suit 
or the presentation of a written statement claiming a set -off 1[or counter -claim] may be raised by the 
defen dant or plaintiff, as the case may be, in his written statement.  
8A. [Duty of defendant to produce documents upon which relief is  claimed by him .] omitted by Act   
46 of 1999, s. 18 ( w.e.f.  1-7-2002).  
2[9. Subsequent pleadings. —No pleading subsequent to the written statement of a defendant other 
than by way of defence to set -off or counter -claim shall be presented except by the leave  of the Court 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 58 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 9, for rules 9 and 10 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  106 
 and upon such terms as the Court thinks fit; but the Court may at any time require a written statement or 
additional written statement from any of the parties and fix a time of not more than thirty days for 
present ing the same.  
10. Procedure  when party fails to present written statement called for by Court. —Where  any 
party from whom a written statement is required under rule 1 or rule 9 fails to present the same within the 
time permitted or fixed by the Court, as the case may be, the Court sh all pronounce judgment against him, 
or make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit and on the pronouncement of such judgment a 
decree shall be drawn up :] 
*[Provided further that no Court shall make an order to extend the time provided under Ru le 1 of this 
Order for filing of the written statement.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs). ― 
In Rule 10, insert the following proviso, namely: - 
Provided that no court shall make an order to extend the time provided under Rule 1 of this ord er for 
filing of the written statement.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptatio n of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Orde r, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
______  
ORDER IX  
Appearance of parties and consequence of non -appearance  
1. Parties to appear on day fixed in summons for defendant to appear and answer. —On the day 
fixed in the summons for the de fendant to appear and answer, the parties shall be in attendance at the 
Court -house in person or by their respective pleaders, and the suit shall then be heard unless the hearing is 
adjourned to a future day fixed by the Court.  
1[2. Dismissal of suit wher e summons not served in consequence of plaintiff's failure to pay 
costs. —Where on the day so fixed it is found that summons has not been served upon the defendant in 
consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court -fee or postal charges, if any , chargeable for 
such service, or failure to present copies of the plaint as required by rule 9 of Order VII, the Court may 
make an order that the suit be dismissed:  
Provided that no such order shall be made, if notwithstanding such failure, the defendant attends in 
person or by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent on the day fixed for him to appear and answer.]  
3. Where neither party appears suit to be dismissed. —Where  neither party appears when the suit 
is called on for hearing, the court may make an order that the suit be dismissed.  
4. Plaintiff may bring fresh suit or Court may restore suit to file. —Where  a suit is dismissed 
under rule 2 or rule 3, the plaintiff may (subject to the law of limitation) bring a fresh suit; or he may 
apply for an orde r to set the dismissal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cause for 
2[such failure as is referred to in rule 2], or for his non -appearance, as the case may be , the Court shall 
make an order setting aside the dismissal and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
5. Dismissal of suit where plaintiff after summons returned unserved, fails for 3[seven days]  to 
apply for fresh summons.  —4[(1) Where after a summons has been issued to the defendant, or to one of 
several defend ants, and returned unserved, the plaintiff fails, for a period of  1[seven days] from the date of 
the return made to the Court by the officer ordinarily certifying to the Court returns made by the serving 
officers, to apply for the issue of a fresh summons  the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed as 
against such defendant, unless the plaintiff has within the said period satisfied the Court that —  
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 s. 59, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 19, for “one month” (w.e.f 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1920 s. 2, for sub -rule ( 1). 107 
  (a) he has failed after using his best endeavours to discover the residence of the defendant, w ho 
has not been served, or  
(b) such defendant is avoiding service of process, or  
(c) there is any other sufficient cause for extending the time,  
in which case the Court may extend the time for making such application for such period as it thinks fit.]  
(2) In such case the plaintiff may (subject to the law of limitation) bring a fresh suit.  
6. Procedure when only plaintiff appears. —(1) Where the plaintiff appears and the defendant does 
not appear when the suit is called on for hearing, then — 
1[(a) When summo ns duly served. —if it is proved that the summons was duly served, the Court 
may make an order that the suit shall be heard ex parte ;] 
(b) When summons not duly served. —if it is not proved that the summons was duly served, the 
Court shall direct a second su mmons to be issued and served on the defendant;  
(c) When summons served but not in due time. —if it is proved that the summons was served 
on the defendant, but not in sufficient time to enable him to appear an d answer on the day fixed in the 
summons,  
the Co urt shall postpone the hearing of the suit to a future day to be fixed by the Court, and shall direct 
notice of such day to be given to the defendant.  
(2) Where it is owing to the plaintiff ’s default that the summons was not duly served or was not served 
in sufficient time, the Court shall order the plaintiff to pay the costs occasioned by the postponement.  
7. Procedure where defendant appears on day of adjourned hearing and assigns good cause for 
previous non -appearance. —Where the Court has adjourned the h earing of the suit, ex parte , and the 
defendant, at or before such hearing appears and assigns good cause for his previous non -appearance, he may , 
upon such terms as the Court directs as to costs or otherwise, be heard in answer to the suit as if he had 
appeared on the day fixed for his appearance.  
8. Procedure where defendant only appears. —Where the defendant appears and the plaintiff does 
not appear when the suit is called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed, 
unless th e defendant admits the claim, or part thereof, in which case the Court shall pass a decree against 
the defendant upon such admission, and where part only of the claim has been admitted, shall dismiss the 
suit so far as it relates to the remainder.  
9. Decre e against plaintiff by default bars fresh suit. —(1) Where a suit is wholly or partly dis -
missed under rule 8, the plaintiff shall be precluded from bringing a fresh suit in respect of the same cause 
of action. But he may apply for an order to set the dismi ssal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that there 
was sufficient cause for his non -appearance when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make 
an order setting aside the dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, a nd shall 
appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
(2) No order shall be made under this rule unless notice of the application has been served on the 
opposite party.  
10. Procedure in case of non -attendance of one or more of several plaintiff's. —Where  there are 
more plaintiffs than one, and one or more of them appear , and the others do not appear, the Court may, at 
the instance of the plaintiff or plaintiff ’s appearing, permit the suit to proceed in the same way as if all the 
plaintiff ’s had appeared, or m ake such order as it thinks fit.  
11. Procedure in case of non -attendance of one or more of several defendants. —Where  there are 
more defendants than one, and one or more of them appear, and the others do not appear, the suit shall 
proceed, and the Court sha ll, at the time of pronouncing judgment, make such order as it thinks fit with 
respect to the defendants who do not appear.  
12. Consequence of non -attendance, without sufficient cause shown, of party ordered to appear 
in person. —Where  a plaintiff or defend ant, who has been ordered to appear in person, does not appear in 
person, or show sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the court for failing so to appear, he shall be subject 
to all provisions of the foregoing rules applicable to plaintiffs and defendan ts, respectively who do not 
appear.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 59, for cl. (a) (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  108 
 Setting aside Decrees ex parte  
13. Setting aside decree ex parte  against defendant. —In any case in which a decree is passed        
ex parte  against a defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree was passed fo r an order to set 
it aside; and if he satisfies the Court that the summons was not duly served, or that he was prevented by 
any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an 
order setting aside the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or otherwise 
as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit:  
Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as against such defen dant 
only it may be set aside as against all or any of the other defendants also:  
1[Provided further than no Court shall set aside a decree passed ex parte  merely on the ground that 
there has been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied that  the defendant had notice of 
the date of hearing and had sufficient time to appear and answer the plaintiff's claim.]  
2[Explanation .—Where there has been an appeal against a decree passed ex parte  under this rule, and 
the appeal has been disposed of an any  ground other than the ground that the appellant has with drawn the 
appeal, no application shall lie under this rule for setting aside that ex parte  decree.]  
14. No decree to be set aside without notice to opposite party. —No decree shall be set aside on 
any such application as aforesaid unless notice thereof has been served on the opposite party.  
ORDER X  
Examination of parties by the court  
1. Ascertainment whether allegations in pleadings are admitted or denied. —At the first hearing 
of the suit the Court sh all ascertain from each party or his pleader whether he admits or denies such 
allegations of fact as are made in the plaint or written statement (if any) of the opposite party, and as are 
not expressly or by necessary implication admitted or denied by the party against whom they are made. 
The Court shall record such admissions and denials.  
3[1A. Direction of the court to opt for any one mode of alternative dispute resolution. —After  
recording the admissions and denials, the court shall direct the parties t o the suit to opt either mode of the 
settlement outside the court as specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 89. On the option of the parties, the 
court shall fix the date of appearance before such forum or authority as may be opted by the parties.  
1B. Appearance before the conciliatory forum or authority. —Where  a suit is referred under rule 
1A, the parties shall appear before such forum or authority for conciliation of the suit.  
1C. Appearance before the court consequent to the failure of efforts of concil iation. —Where  a suit is 
referred under  rule 1A, and the presiding officer of conciliation forum or authority is satisfied that it 
would not be proper in the interest of justice to proceed with the matter further, then, it shall refer the 
matter again to th e court and direct the parties to appear before the court on the date fixed by it.]  
4[2. Oral examination of party, or companion of party. —(1) At the first hearing of the suit, the Court — 
(a) shall, with a view to elucidating matters in controversy in the suit examine orally such of the 
parties to the suit appearing in person or present in Court, as it deems fit; and  
(b) may orally examine any person, able to answer any material question relating to the suit, by 
whom any party appearing in person or present  in Court or his pleader is accompanied.  
(2) At any subsequent hearing, the Court may orally examine any party appearing in person or 
present in Court, or any person, able to answer any material question relating to the suit, by whom such 
party or his plea der is accompanied.  
(3) The Court may, if it thinks fit, put in the course of an examination under this rule questions 
suggested by either party.]  
  
                                                      
1. The proviso a dded by Act 104 of 1976, s. 59 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Explanation  ins. by s. 59, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. b y Act 46 of 1999, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 60, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  109 
 13. Substance of examination to be written. —The substance of the examination shall be reduced 
to writing by t he Judge, and shall form part of the record.  
4. Consequence of refusal or inability of pleader to answer. —(1) Where the pleader of any party 
who appears by a pleader or any such person accompanying a pleader as is referred to in rule 2, refuses 
or is unabl e to answer any material question relating to the suit which the Court is of opinion that the 
party whom he represents ought to answer, and is likely to be able to answer if interrogated in person, 
the Court 2[may postpone the hearing of the suit to a day not later than seven days from the date of first 
hearing] and direct that such party shall appear in person on such day.  
(2) If such party fails without lawful excuse to appear in person on the day so appointed, the Court 
may pronounce judgment against him , or make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit.  
______  
ORDER XI  
Discovery  and  Inspection  
1. Discovery by interrogatories. —In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the Court may deliver 
interrogatories in writing for the examinati on of the opposite parties or any one or more of such parties and 
such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such interrogatories 
each of such person is required to answer: Provided that no party shall delive r more than one set of 
interrogatories to the same party without an order for that purpose: Provided also that interrogatories which do 
not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might be 
admissi ble on the oral cross -examination of a witness.  
2. Particular interrogatories to be submitted. —On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, 
the particular interrogatories proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the Court 3[and that court shall 
decide within seven days from the day of filing of the said application]. In deciding upon such application, 
the Court shall take into account any offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated to 
deliver particulars, or to make admi ssions, or to produce documents relating to the matters in question, or 
any of them, and leave shall be given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the Court shall 
consider necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs . 
3. Costs of interrogatories .—In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any 
party be made into the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing 
officer or of the Court, either with or witho ut an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have 
been exhibited unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the cost occasioned by the 
interrogatories and the answers thereto shall be paid in any even by the party in fault.  
4. Form of in terrogatories. —Interrogatories  shall be in Form No. 2 in Appendix C, with such 
variations as circumstances may require.  
5. Corporations. —Where  any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not, empowered by law to sue o r be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of any 
officer or other person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories 
to any member or officer of such corporation or body, and  an order may be made accordingly.  
6. Objections to interrogatories by answer. —Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the 
ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide  for the purpose of the suit, or that the 
matters inquired into are not sufficiently materi al at that stage, 4[or on the ground of privilege or any 
other ground], may be taken in the affidavit in answer.  
7. Setting aside and striking out interrogatories. —Any interrogatories may be set aside on the 
ground that they have been exhibited unreasonabl y or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they 
are prolix, oppre ssive, unnecessary or scandalous ; and any application for this purpose may be made 
within seven days after service of the interrogatories.  
8.  Affidavit in answer, filing. —Interrogato ries shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten 
days or within such other time as the Court may allow.  
                                                      
1. This rule is not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Court Act, 1925 ( U.P. 4 of 19.25), s. 16( 2). 
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s.  20, for certain words (w.e.f . 1-7-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 61, for certain words (w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  110 
 9. Form of affidavit in answer. —An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in Form No. 3 in 
Appendix C, with such variations as circum stances may require.  
10. No exception to be taken. —No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the 
sufficiency or otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the 
Court.  
11. Order to answer or answer f urther. —Where  any person interrogated omits to answer, or 
answer insufficiently, the party interrogating may apply to the Court for an order requiring him to 
answer, or to answer further, as the case may be. And an order may be made requiring him to answer  or 
answer further, either by affidavit or by viva voce examination, as the Court may direct.  
12. Application for discovery of documents. —Any party may, without filing any affidavit, apply to 
the Court for an order directing any other party to any suit to make discovery on oath s, of the documents 
which are or have been in his possession or power , relating to any matter in question therein. On the 
hearing of such application the Court may either refuse or adjourn the same, if satisfied that such 
discovery is  not necessary, or not necessary at that stage of the suit, or make such order, either generally 
or limited to certain classes of documents, as may, in its discretion be thought fit:  Provided that 
discovery shall not be ordered when and so far as the Court  shall be of opinion that it is not necessary 
either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
13. Affidavit of documents. —The affidavit to be made by a party against whom such order as is 
mentioned in the last preceding rule has been made, sha ll specify which (if any) of the documents therein 
mentioned he objects to produce, and it shall be in Form No. 5 in Appendix C, with such variations as 
circumstances may require.  
14. Production of documents. —It shall be lawful for the Court, at any time d uring the pendency of 
any suit, to order the production by any party thereto, upon oath , of such of the documents in his 
possession or power, relating to any matter in question in such suit, as the Court shall think right; and the 
Court may deal with such documents, when produced, in such manner as shall appear just.  
15. Inspection of documents referred to in pleadings or affidavits. —Every  party to a suit shall be 
entitled 1[at or before the settlement of issues] to give notice to any other party, in whose pleadings or 
affidavits reference is made to any document , 2[or who has entered any document in any list annexed to 
his pleadings ,] to produce such document for the inspection of the party giving such notice, or of his 
pleader, and to permit him  or them to  take copies thereof;  and any party not complying with such notice 
shall not afterwards be at liberty to put any such document in evidence on his behalf in such suit unless 
he shall satisfy the Court that such document relates only to his own title, he bei ng a defendant to the 
suit, or that he had some other cause or excuse which the Court shall deem sufficient for not complying 
with such notice, in which case the Court may allow the same to be put in evidence on such terms as to 
costs and otherwise as the Court shall think fit.  
16. Notice to produce. —Notice  to any party to produce any documents referred to in his pleading or 
affidavits shall be in Form No. 7 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
17.  Time for inspection when not ice given. —The party to whom such notice is given shall, within 
ten days from the receipt of such notice, deliver to the party giving the same a notice stating a time within 
three days from the delivery thereof at which the documents, or such of them as he  does not object to 
produce, may be inspected at the office of his pleader, or in the case of bankers' books or other books of 
account or books in constant use for the purposes of any trade or business, at their usual place of custody, 
and stating which (i f any) of the documents he objects to produce, and on what ground. Such notice shall 
be in Form No. 8 in Appendix C; with such variations as circumstances may require.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 21, for “at any time” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 61 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  111 
 18. Order for inspection. —(1) Where the party served with notice rule 15 omits to give s uch notice 
of a time for inspection or objects to give inspection, or offers inspection elsewhere than at the office of 
his pleader, the Court may, on the application of the party desiring it, make an order for inspection in such 
place and in such manner a s it may think fit:  Provided that the order shall not be made when and so far as 
the Court shall be of opinion that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving 
costs.  
(2) Any application to inspect documents, except such as ar e referred to in the pleadings, particulars 
or affidavit of the party against whom the application is made or disclosed in his affidavit of documents, 
shall be founded upon an affidavit showing of what documents inspection is sought, that the party 
applyin g is entitled to inspect them, and that they are in the possession or power of the other party. The 
Court shall not make such order for inspection of such documents when and so far as the Court shall be of 
opinion that it is not necessary either for dispos ing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
19. Verified copies. —(1) Where inspection of any business books is applied for, the Court may, if it 
thinks fit , instead of ordering inspection of the original books, order a copy of any entries therein to be 
furnished and verified by the affidavit of some person who has examined the copy with the original 
entries, and such affidavit shall state whether or not there are in the original book any and what erasures, 
interlineations or alterations: Provided that, notw ithstanding that such copy has been supplied, the Court 
may order inspection of the book from which the copy was made.  
(2) Where on an application for an order for inspection privilege is claimed for any document, it shall 
be lawful for the Court to inspec t the document for the purpose of deciding as to the validity of the claim 
of privilege 1[unless the document relates to matters of State .] 
(3) The Court may , on the application of any party to suit at any time, and whether an affidavit of 
documents shall or shall not have already been ordered or made, make an order requiring any other 
party to state by affidavit whether any one or more specific documents, to be specified in the 
application, is or are, or has or have at any time been, in his possession or p ower; and , if not then in 
his possession, when he parted with the same and what has become thereof. Such application shall be 
made on an affidavit stating that in the belief of the deponent the party against whom the application 
is made has, or has at so me time had in his possession or power the document or documents specified 
in the application, and that they relate to the matters in question in the suit , or to some of them.  
20. Premature discovery. —Where  the party from whom discovery of any kind or inspec tion is 
sought objects to the same, or any part thereof, the Court may , if satisfied that the right to the discovery or 
inspection sought depends on the determination of any issue or question in dispute in the suit, or that for 
any other reason it is desir able that any issue or question in dispute in the suit should be determined 
before deciding upon the right to the discovery or inspection, order that such issue or question be 
determined first , and reserve the question as to the discovery or inspection.  
21. Non -compliance with order for discovery. —2[(1)] Where any party fails to comply with any order to 
answer interrogatories , or for discovery or inspection of documents, he shall, if a plaintiff, be liable to have his 
suit dismissed for want of prosecution,  and, if a defendant, to have his defence, if any struck out, and to be  
placed in the same position as if he had not defended, and the party interrogating or seeking discovery or 
inspection may apply to the Court for an order to that effect and 3[an order may be made on such 
application accordingly, after notice to the parties and after giving them a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard.]  
4[(2) Where an order is made under sub -rule ( 1) dismissing any suit, the plaintiff shall be precluded 
from bringing a f resh suit on the same cause of action.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 61 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Rule 21 renumbered as sub -rule (1) by s. 61 (w.e.f. 1 -2-19.77).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 61, ibid. for “an order may be made accordingly” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. b y s. 61,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
 112 
 22. Using answer to interrogatories at trial. —Any party may, at the trial of a suit, use in evidence 
any one or more of the answers or any part of an answer of the opposite party to interrogatories without 
putting in  the others or the whole of such answer : Provided always that in such case the Court may look 
at the whole of the answers, and if it shall be of opinion that any others of them are so connected with 
those put in that the last -mentioned answer ought not to  be used without them, it may direct them to be 
put in.  
23. Order to apply to minors. —This Order shall apply to minor plaintiffs and defendants, and to the 
next friends and guardians for the suit of persons under disability.  
______  
*[ORDER XI  
Disclosure, Discovery and inspection of documents in suits before the commercial division of a high 
court or a commercial court  
1. Disclosure and discovery of documents .—(1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and 
photocopies of all documents, in its power, po ssession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along 
with the plaint, including: —  
(a) documents referred to and relied on by the plaintiff in the plaint;  
(b) documents relating to any matter in question in the proceedings, in the power, possession , 
control or custody of the plaintiff, as on the date of filing the plaint, irrespective of whether the same 
is in support of or adverse to the plaintiff’s case;  
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by plaintiffs and relevant only –– 
 (i) for the cross -examination of the defendant’s witnesses, or  
 (ii) in answer to any case set up by the defendant subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or  
 (iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(2) The list of documents filed wi th the plaint shall specify whether the documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are originals, office copies or photocopies and the list shall 
also set out in brief, details of parties to each document, mode of execution, is suance or receipt and line of 
custody of each document.  
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that all documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, pertaining to the facts and circumstances of th e proceedings 
initiated by him have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and that the plaintiff does 
not have any other documents in its power, possession, control or custody.  
Explanation. ––A declaration on oath under this sub -rule sh all be contained in the Statement of Truth 
as set out in the Appendix.  
(4) In case of urgent filings, the plaintiff may seek leave to rely on additional documents, as part of the 
above declaration on oath and subject to grant of such leave by Court, the p laintiff shall file such 
additional documents in Court, within thirty days of filing the suit, along with a declaration on oath that 
the plaintiff has  produced all documents in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the 
facts and circumst ances of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does not have 
any other documents, in its power, possession, control or custody.  
(5) The plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were in the plaintiff’s power, 
possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with plaint or within the extended period set out 
above, save and except by leave of Court and such leave shall be granted only upon the plaintiff 
establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosure along w ith the plaint.  113 
 (6) The plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff believes to be in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the defendant and which the plaintiff wishes to rely upon and seek leave 
for production thereof by the sai d defendant.  
(7) The defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all documents, in its power, 
possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along with the written statement or with its counter -
claim if any, including — 
(a) the documents referred to and relied on by the defendant in the written statement;  
(b) the documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding in the power, possession, 
control or custody of the defendant, irrespective of whether the same is in su pport of or adverse to the 
defendant’s defence;  
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by the defendants and relevant only ––  
(i) for the cross -examination of the plaintiff’s witnesses,  
(ii) in answer to any case set up by the plaintif f subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or  
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counterclaim shall specify whether the 
documents, in the power, possession, control or  custody of the defendant, are originals, office copies or 
photocopies and the list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document being produced by 
the defendant, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line of custody of each documen t.  
(9) The written statement or counterclaim shall contain a declaration on oath made by the deponent 
that all documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, save and except for those 
set out in sub -rule (7) ( c) (iii) pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the 
plaintiff or in the counterclaim, have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the written 
statement or counterclaim and that the defendant does not have in its power, possession, co ntrol or 
custody, any other documents.  
(10) Save and except for sub -rule ( 7) (c) (iii), defendant shall not be allowed to rely on documents, 
which were in the defendant’s power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with the 
written state ment or counterclaim, save and except by leave of Court and such leave shall be granted only 
upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosure along with the written statement or 
counterclaim.  
(11) The written statement or counterclaim sh all set out details of documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, which the defendant wishes to rely upon and which have 
not been disclosed with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce the same.  
(12) Duty to disclos e documents, which have come to the notice of a party, shall continue till disposal 
of the suit.  
2. Discovery by interrogatories . — (1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court 
may deliver interrogatories in writing for the examination  of the opposite parties or any one or more of 
such parties, and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of 
such interrogatories each of such persons is required to answer:  
Provided that no party shall deliv er more than one set of interrogatories to the same party without an 
order for that purpose:  
Provided further that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be 
deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might be ad missible on the oral cross -examination of a 
witness.  
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories proposed to be 
delivered shall be submitted to the court, and that court shall decide within seven days from th e day of 
filing of the said application, in deciding upon such application, the court shall take into account any 114 
 offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make 
admissions, or to produce documents relatin g to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be 
given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider necessary either for 
disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
(3) In adjusting the costs of the su it inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made into the 
propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the court, 
either with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have b een exhibited 
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by the said interrogatories and the 
answers thereto shall be paid in any event by the party in fault.  
(4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 2 in Ap pendix C to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, (5 of 1908) with such variations as circumstances may require.  
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, 
empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of any officer of other 
person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any member 
or officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made accordingly.  
(6) Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or 
not exhibited bona  fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters inquired into are not sufficiently 
material at that stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground may be taken in the affidavit in 
answer.  
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited unreasonably or 
vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous and 
any application for this purpose may be made within seven days after service of the interrogatories.  
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days, or within such other time 
as the court may allow.  
(9) An affidavit in answe r to interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 3 in    
Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,  (5 of 1908),  with such variations as circumstances may 
require.  
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the s ufficiency or otherwise of any 
such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the court.  
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers insufficiently, the party interrogating 
may apply to the court for an order requiring  him to answer, or to answer further, as the case may be, and 
an order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer further, either affidavit or by viva voce  
examination, as the court may direct.  
3. Inspection.  — (1) All parties shall complete inspec tion of all documents disclosed within thirty 
days of the date of filing of the written statement or written statement to the counterclaim, whichever is 
later. The Court may extend this time limit upon application at its discretion, but not beyond thirty d ays in 
any event.  
(2) Any party to the proceedings may seek directions from the Court, at any stage of the proceedings, 
for inspection or production of documents by the other party, of which inspection has been refused by 
such party or documents have not been produced despite issuance of a notice to produce.  
(3) Order in such application shall be disposed of within thirty days of filing such application, 
including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted by Court) and hearing.  
(4) If the above applicat ion is allowed, inspection and copies thereof shall be furnished to the party 
seeking it, within five days of such order.  
(5) No party shall be permitted to rely on a document, which it had failed to disclose or of which 
inspection has not been given, save  and except with leave of Court.  
(6) The Court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party, who wilfully or negligently 
failed to disclose all documents pertaining to a suit or essential for a decision therein and which are in 115 
 their power, posses sion, control or custody or where a Court holds that inspection or copies of any 
documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld or refused.  
4. Admission and denial of documents. — (1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or 
denials of  all documents disclosed and of which inspection has been completed, within fifteen days of the 
completion of inspection or any later date as fixed by the Court.  
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly, whether such party was a dmitting 
or denying: — 
(a) correctness of contents of a document;  
(b) existence of a document;  
(c) execution of a document;  
(d) issuance or receipt of a document;  
(e) custody of a document.  
Explanation. ––A statement of admission or denial of the existe nce of a document made in accordance 
with sub -rule ( 2) (b) shall include the admission or denial of the contents of a document.  
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any of the above grounds and bare 
and unsupported denials shal l not be deemed to be denials of a document and proof of such documents 
may then be dispensed with at the discretion of the Court.  
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party documents of which the party denying 
does not have any personal  knowledge of, and to which the party denying is not a party to in any manner 
whatsoever.  
(5) An Affidavit in support of the statement of admissions and denials shall be filed confirming the 
correctness of the contents of the statement.  
(6) In the event t hat the Court holds that any party has unduly refused to admit a document under any 
of the above criteria,  – costs (including exemplary costs) for deciding on admissibility of a document may 
be imposed by the Court on such party.  
(7) The Court may pass or ders with respect to admitted documents including for waiver of further 
proof thereon or rejection of any documents.  
5. Production of documents.  — (1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the Court may order, at 
any time during the pendency of any suit, p roduction by any party or person, of such documents in the 
possession or power of such party or person, relating to any matter in question in such suit.  
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the Form provided in Form No. 7 in    
Appendix C  to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) .  
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall be given not less than seven 
days and not more than fifteen days to produce such document or to answer to their inability to produce 
such document.  
(4) The Court may draw an adverse inference against a party refusing to produce such document after 
issuance of a notice to produce and where sufficient reasons for such non -production are not given and 
order costs.  
6. Electronic records.  — (1) In case of disclosures and inspection of Electronic Records (as defined 
in the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000) ), furnishing of printouts shall be sufficient 
compliance of the above provisions.  
(2) At the discretion of the parties or whe re required (when parties wish to rely on audio or video 
content), copies of electronic records may be furnished in electronic form either in addition to or in lieu of 
printouts.  116 
 (3) Where Electronic Records form part of documents disclosed, the declaratio n on oath to be filed by 
a party shall specify ––  
(a) the parties to such Electronic Record;  
(b) the manner in which such electronic record was produced and by whom;  
(c) the dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or receipt of each such elec tronic 
record;  
(d) the source of such electronic record and date and time when the electronic record was printed;  
(e) in case of email ids, details of ownership, custody and access to such email ids;  
(f) in case of documents stored on a computer or comput er resource (including on external servers 
or cloud), details of ownership, custody and access to such data on the computer or computer 
resource;  
(g) deponent’s knowledge of contents and correctness of contents;  
(h) whether the computer or computer resourc e used for preparing or receiving or storing such 
document or data was functioning properly or in case of malfunction that such malfunction did not 
affect the contents of the document stored;  
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the origi nal computer or computer resource.  
(4) The parties relying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any electronic records, shall not be 
required to give inspection of electronic records, provided a declaration is made by such party that each 
such copy , which has been produced, has been made from the original electronic record.  
(5) The Court may give directions for admissibility of Electronic Records at any stage of the 
proceedings.  
(6) Any party may seek directions from the Court and the Court may of its motion issue directions for 
submission of further proof of any electronic record including metadata or logs before admission of such 
electronic record.  
7. Certain provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 not to apply. —For avoidance of doubt, 
it is hereby clarified that Order XIII Rule 1, Order VII Rule 14 and Order VIII Rule 1A of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall not apply to suits or applications before the Commercial Divisions 
of High Court or Commercial Courts. ] 
STATE AMENDM ENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs). ― 
For Order XI of the Code, substitute the following Order, namely. – 
“ORDER XI  
DISCLOSURE, DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS  
1. Disclosure and discovery of documents. —(1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and 
photocopies of  all documents, in  its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along 
with the plaint,  including: – 
(a) documents referred and relied on by the plaintiff in the plaint;  
(b) documents relating to any matter in question in the proceedings, in the power, p ossession, control 
or custody of the plaintiff, as on the date of filing the plaint, irrespective of whether the same is in support  
of or adverse to the plaintiffs case; and  
(c) nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced by plaintiffs and relev ant only – 
 (i) for the cross -examination of the defendant‘s witnesses, or  
 (ii) in answer to any case setup by the defendant subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or  
 (iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(2) The list of documents filed with the plaint shall specify whether the documents in the power,  
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are originals, office copies or photocopies and the list 
shall also  set out in brief, details of parties to each document, mode or execu tion, issuance or receipt 
and line of custody  of each document.  
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that all documents in the power,  117 
 possession, control, or custody of the plaintiff, pertaining to the facts and circumstanc es of the 
proceedings  initiated by him have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and that 
the plaintiff does not  have any other documents in its power, possession, control or custody.  
Explanation. — A declaration on oath under this sub -rule shall be contained in the Statement of Truth 
as set out  in the Appendix I.  
(4) In case of urgent filings, the plaintiff may seek leave to rely on additional documents, as part  of 
the above declaration on oath and subject to grant of such leave by cou rt, the plaintiff shall file such  
additional documents in court, within thirty days of filing the suit, along with a declaration on oath that 
the plaintiff has produced all documents in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the 
facts and  circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does not have 
any other  documents, in its power, possession, control or custody.  
(5) The plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were in the plaintiff’s power, 
possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with plaint or within the extended period set out 
above, save and except by leave of court and such leave shall be granted only upon the plaintiff 
establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosur e along with the plaint.  
(6) The plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff believes to be in the power, 
possession, control or custody or the defendant and which the plaintiff wishes to rely upon and seek 
leave for production thereof b y the said defendant.  
(7) The defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all documents, in its power, 
possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along with the written statement or with its 
counter -claim if any, including – 
(a) the documents referred to and relied on by the defendant in the written statement;  
(b) the documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding in the power, possession, 
control or custody of the defendant, irrespective of whether the same i s in support of or adverse to 
the defendant’s defense;  
(c) nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced by the defendants and relevant only – 
(i) for the cross -examination of the plaintiff‘s witnesses;  
(ii) in answer to any case setup by the plain tiff subsequent to the filing of the plaint; or  
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counter -claim shall specify whether 
the documents, in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, are originals, office 
copies or photocopies and the list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document being 
produced by the defendant, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line of custody of each 
docum ent.  
(9) the written statement or counter -claim shall contain a declaration on oath made by the deponent 
that all documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, save and except for 
those set out in  sub -rule (7) (c) (iii), pertai ning to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings 
initiated by the plaintiff or in the counter -claim, have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with 
the written statement or counter -claim and that the defendant does not have in its power, possess ion, 
control or custody, any other documents.  
(10) Save and except for sub -rule (7) (c) (iii), defendant shall not be allowed to rely on documents, 
which were in the defendant‘s power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with the 
written  statement or counter -claim, save and except by leave of court and such leave shall be granted 
only upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosure along with the written 
statement or counter -claim.  
(11) The written statement or counter -claim shall set out details of documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, which the defendant wishes to rely upon and which 
have not been disclosed with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce the same.  
(12) Duty t o disclose documents, which have come to the notice of a party, shall continue till 
disposal  of the suit.  
2. Discovery by interrogatories. —(1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court may 
deliver interrogatories in writing for the exami nation of the opposite parties or anyone or more of such 118 
 parties, and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such 
interrogatories each of such persons is required to answer:  
Provided that no party shall d eliver more than one set of interrogatories to the same party without an  
order for that purpose:  
Provided further that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be 
deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might be  admissible on the oral cross -examination of a 
witness.  
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories proposed to 
be delivered shall be submitted to the court, and that court shall decide within seven days from the day 
of filing of the said application, in deciding upon such application, the court shall take into account 
any offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make 
admissions, or to produce documents relat ing to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave 
shall be given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider necessary 
either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
(3) In adjusting the costs of the s uit inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made into the 
propriety  
of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the court, either 
with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have been exhibited unreasonably, 
vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by the said interrogatories and the answers 
thereto shall be paid in any event by the party in fault.  
(4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 2 in A ppendix C to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, 
empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name  or in the name of any officer of other 
person, any opposite party may apply for any order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any 
member or officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made accordingly.  
(6) Any objection to answering an y interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or 
not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters required into are not sufficiently 
material at that stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground may b e taken in the affidavit in 
answer.  
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited unreasonably 
or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous 
and any applicatio n for this purpose may be made within seven days after service of the 
interrogatories.  
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days, or within such other 
time as the court may allow.  
(9) An affidavit in answer to interroga tories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 3 in 
Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the sufficiency or otherwise of any 
such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the court.  
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers insufficiently, the party 
interrogating may apply to the court for an order requiring him to answer, or to answer fu rther, as the 
case may be, and an order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer further, either affidavit 
or by viva voce examination, as the court may direct.  
3. Inspection. –(1) All parties shall complete inspection of all documents disclosed wi thin thirty days 
of the date of filing of the written statement or written statement to the counter -claim, whichever is later, 
the court may extend this time limit upon application at its discretion, but not beyond thirty days in any 
event.  
(2) Any party t o the proceedings may seek directions from the court, at any stage of the proceedings, 
for inspection or production of documents by the other party, of which inspection has been refused by 
such party or documents have not been produced despite issuance of a notice to produce.  119 
 (3) Order in such application shall be disposed of within thirty days of filing such application, 
including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted by court) and hearing.  
(4) If the above application is allowed, inspection and copi es thereof shall be furnished to the party  
seeking it, within five days of such order.  
(5) No party shall be permitted to rely on a document, which it had failed to disclose or of which  
inspection has not been given, save and except with leave of court.  
(6) The Court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party, who willfully or negligently 
failed to disclose all documents pertaining to a suit or essential for a decision therein and which are in 
their power, possession, control or custody or where a court holds that inspection or copies of any 
documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld or refused.  
4. Admission and denial of documents. —(1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or 
denials of all documents disclosed and of which  inspection has been completed, within fifteen days of the 
completion of inspection or any later date as fixed by the court.  
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly, whether such party was 
admitting or denying:  
(a) correctness of contents of a document;  
(b) existence of a document;  
(c) execution of a document;  
(d) issuance or receipt of a document;  
(e) custody of a document.  
Explanation .—A statement of admission or denial of the existence of a document made in 
accordance with cl ause (b) of sub -rule (2) shall include the admission or denial of the contents of a 
document.  
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any of the above grounds and 
bare and unsupported denials shall not be deemed to be denials of a  document and proof of such 
documents may then be dispensed with at the direction of the court.  
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party documents of which the party 
denying does not have any personal knowledge of, and to which the par ty denying is not a party to in 
any manner whatsoever.  
(5) An affidavit in support of the statement of admissions and denials shall be filed confirming the 
correctness of the contents of the statement.  
(6) In the event that the court holds that any party h as unduly refused to admit a document under 
any of the above criteria, costs (including exemplary costs) for deciding on admissibility of a 
document may be imposed by the court on such party.  
(7) The court may pass orders with respect to admitted documents  including for waiver of further 
proof thereon or rejection of any documents.  
5. Production of documents. —(1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the court may order, at any 
time during the pendency of any suit, production by any party or person, of such  documents in the 
possession or  power of such party or person, relating to any matter in question in such suit.  
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the form provided in Form No. 7 in Appendix C  to 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall be given not less than seven days  and 
not more than fifteen days to produce such document or to answer to their inability to produce such  document.  
(4) The court may draw an adve rse inference against a party refusing to produce such document after  
issuance of a notice to produce and where sufficient reasons for such non -production are not given and 
order  costs.  
6. Electronic Records. —(1) In case of disclosures and inspection of el ectronic records as defined in 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), furnishing of printouts shall be sufficient compliance 
of the  above provisions.  
(2) At the discretion of the parties or where required (when parties wish to rely on audio or video  
content), copies of electronic records may be furnished in electronic form either in addition to or in 
lieu of  printouts.  120 
 (3) Where electronic records form part of documents disclosed, the declaration on oath to be filed 
by a party shall specify – 
(a) the parties to such electronic record;  
(b) the manner in which such electronic record was produced and by whom;  
(c) the dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or receipt of each such electronic  
record;  
(d) the source of such electronic reco rd and date and time when the electronic record was 
printed;  
(e) in case of e -mail ids, details of ownership, custody and access to such e -mail ids;  
(f) in case of documents stored on a computer or computer resource (including on external 
servers  or cloud) , details of ownership, custody and access to such data on the computer or 
computer  resource;  
(g) deponent‘s knowledge of contents and correctness of contents;  
(h) whether the computer or computer resource used for preparing or receiving or storing such  
document or data was functioning properly or in case of malfunction that such malfunction did  not 
affect the contents of the document stored;  
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the original computer or computer 
resource.  
(4) The parties r elying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any electronic records, shall not 
be required to give inspection of electronic records, provided a declaration is made by such party that 
each such  copy, which has been produced, has been made from the ori ginal Electronic Records.  
(5) The court may give directions for admissibility of electronic records at any stage of the 
proceedings.  
(6) Any party may seek directions from the court and the court may of its motion issue directions 
for submission of further  proof of any electronic record including metadata or logs before admission of 
such electronic record.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Terri tory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
______  
  121 
 ORDER XII  
Admissions  
1. Notice of admission of case. —Any party  to a suit may give notice, by his pleading, or otherwise in  
writing, that he admits the truth of the whole or any part of the case of any other party.  
2. Notice to admit documents. —Either  party may call upon the other party 1[to admit, within 
2[seven] days from the date of service of the notice any document,] savi ng all exceptions; and in case of 
refusal or neglect to admit, after such notice, the costs of proving any such document shall be paid by the  
party so neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the suit may be, unless the Court otherwise 
directs; and no costs of proving any document shall be allowed unless such notice is given, except where 
the omission to give the notice is, in the opinion of the Court, a saving of expense.  
3[2A. Document to be deemed to be admitted if not denied after service of noti ce to admit 
documents. —(1) Every document which a party is called upon to admit, if not denied specifically or by 
necessary implication, or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of that party or in his reply to the notice 
to admit documents, shall be d eemed to be admitted except as against a person under a disability:  
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded, require any document so 
admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admission.  
(2) Where a party unreasonabl y neglects or refuses to admit a document after the service on him of the 
notice to admit documents, the Court may direct him to pay costs to the other party by way of 
compensation.]  
3. Form of notice. —A notice to admit documents shall be in Form No. 9 in Appendix C , with such 
variations as circumstances may require.  
4[3A. Power of Court to record admission. —Notwithstanding  that no notice to admit documents 
has been given under rule 2 , the Court may, at any stage of the proceeding before it, of its own moti on, 
call upon any party to admit any document and shall, in such a case, record whether the party admits or 
refuses or neglects to admit such document.]  
4. Notice to admit acts .—Any party, may, b y notice in writing, at any time not later than nine days 
before the day fixed for the hearing, call on any other party to admit , for the purposes of the suit only, any 
specific fact or facts, mentioned in such notice. And in case of refusal or neglect to admit the same within 
six days after service of such notice,  or within such further time as may be allowed by the Court, the costs 
of proving such fact  or facts shall be paid by the party so neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the 
suit may be, unless the Court otherwise directs:   
Provided that any admiss ion made in pursuance of such notice is to be deemed to be made only for 
the purposes of the particular suit, and not as an admission to be used against the party on any other 
occasion or in favour of any person other than the party giving the notice:  
5*   *         *   *   * 
5. Form of admissions. —A notice to admit facts shall be in Form No. 10 in Appendix C, and admission  of 
facts shall be in Form No. 11 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
6[6. Judgment on admissions. —(1) Whe re admissions of fact have been made either in the pleading 
or othe rwise; whether orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage of the suit, either on the application 
of any party or of its own motion and without waiting for the determination of any oth er question-between 
the parties, make such order or give such judgment as it may think fit, having regard to such admissions.  
(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub -rule ( 1) a decree shall be drawn up in accordance 
with the judgment and the decree  shall bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s . 62, for “to admit any document” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by A ct 46 of 1999, s. 22, for “fifteen” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 62 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
5. Second proviso omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 197 6, s. 62, for rule 6 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  122 
 7. Affidavit of signature. —An affidavit of the pleader or his clerk, of the due signature of any 
admissions made in pursuance of any notice to admit documents or facts, shall be sufficient evidenc ed of 
such admissions, if evidence thereof is required.  
8. Notice to produce documents. —Notice  to produce documents shall be in Form No. 12 in      
Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require. An affidavit of the pleader, or his clerk, of  
the Service of any notice to produce, and of the time when it was served, with a copy of the notice to produce, 
shall in all cases be sufficient evidence of the service of the notice, and of the time when it was served.  
9. Costs. —If a notice to admit or p roduce specifies documents which are not necessary, the costs 
occasioned thereby shall be borne by the party giving such notice.  
______  
ORDER XIII  
Production , Impounding and Return of Documents  
1[1. Original documents to be produced at or before the settle ment of issues .—(1) The parties or 
their pleader shall produce on or before the settlement of issues, all the documentary evidence in original 
where the  copies thereof have been filed along with plaint or written statement.  
(2) The Court shall receive the documents so produced:  
Provided that they are accompanied by an accurate list thereof prepared in such form as the High 
Court directs.  
(3) Nothing in sub -rule ( 1) shall apply to documents —  
(a) produced for the cross -examination of the witnesses of the oth er party; or  
(b) handed over to a witness  merely to refresh his memory.]  
 2. [Effect of non -production of documents .] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999 
(46 of 1999 ) s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002 ). 
3. Rejection of irrelevant or inadmissible  documents. —The Court may at any stage of the suit reject 
any document which it considers irrelevant or otherwise inadmissible, recording the grounds of such 
rejection. 
4. Endorsements on documents admitted in evidence. —(1) Subject to the provisions  of the  next 
following sub -rule, there shall be endorsed on every document which has been admitted in evidence in the 
suit the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the number and title of the suit,  
(b) the name of the person producing the document,  
(c) the date on  which it was produced, and  
(d) a statement o f its having been so admitted , 
and the endorsement shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.  
(2) Where a document so admitted is an entry in a book, account or record, and a copy thereof has 
been substituted f or the original under the next following rule, the particulars aforesaid shall be endorsed 
on the copy and the endorsement thereon shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.  
5. Endorsements on copies of admitted entries in books, accounts and records. —(1) Save in so 
far as is otherwise provided by the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 ( XVIII  of 1891) where a 
document admitted in evidence in the suit is an entry in a letter -book or a shop -book or other account in 
current use, the party on whose behalf the b ook or account is produced may furnish a copy of the entry.  
(2) Where such a document is an entry in a public record produced from a public office or by a public 
officer, or an entry in a book or account belonging to a person other than a party on whose be half the 
book or account is produced, the Court may require a copy of the entry to be furnished — 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 23, for rules 1 and 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  123 
 (a) where the record, book or account is produced on behalf of a party, then by that party, or  
(b) where the record, book or account is produced in obedience t o an order of the Court acting of 
its own motion, then by either or any party.  
(3) Where a copy of an entry is furnished under the foregoing provisions of this rule, the Court shall, after 
causing the copy to be examined, compared and certified in manner m entioned in rule 17 of Order VII, mark 
the entry and cause the book, account or record in which it occurs to be returned to the person producing it.  
6. Endorsements on documents rejected an inadmissible in evidence. —Where  a document relied 
on as evidence b y either party is considered by the Court to be inadmissible in evidence, there shall be 
endorsed thereon the particulars mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of rule 4, sub -rule (1) together with 
a statement of its having been rejected, and the endorseme nt shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.  
7. Recording of admitted and return of rejected documents. —(1) Every documents which has 
been admitted in evidence, or a copy thereof where a copy has been substituted for the original under rule 
5, shall form  part of the record of the suit.  
(2) Documents not admitted in evidence shall not form part of the record and shall be returned to the 
persons respectively producing them.  
8. Court may order any document to be impounded. —Notwithstanding  anything contained in rule 
5 or rule 7 of this Order or in rule 17 of Order VII, the Court may, if it sees sufficient cause, direct any 
document or book produced before it in any suit to be impounded and kept in the custody of an officer of 
the Court, for such period and sub ject to such conditions as the Court thinks fit.  
9. Return of admitted documents. —(1) Any person, whether a party to the suit or not, desirous of 
receiving back any documents produced by him in the suit and placed on the record shall, unless the 
document i s impounded under rule 8, be entitled to receive back the same, —  
(a) where the suit is one in which an appeal is not allowed, when the suit has been disposed of, and  
(b) where the suit is one in which an appeal is allowed, when the Court is satisfied that  the time 
for preferring an appeal has elapsed and that no appeal has been preferred or, if an appeal has been 
preferred, when the appeal has been disposed of:  
1[Provided that a document may be returned at any time earlier then that prescribed by this rule  if the 
person applying therefor —  
(a) delivers to the proper officer for being substituted for the original, — 
(i) in the case of a party to the suit, a certified copy, and  
(ii) in the case of any other person, an ordinary copy which has been examined, com pared 
and certified in the manner mentioned in sub -rule ( 2) of rule 17 of Order VII, and  
 (b) undertakes to produce the original, if required to do so:]  
Provided also, that no document shall be returned with, by force of the decree, has become wholly 
void or useless.  
(2) On  the return of a document admitted in evidence, a receipt shall be given by the person 
receiving it.  
10. Court may send for papers from its own records or from other Courts. —(1) The Court may 
of its own motion, and may in its discretion u pon the application of any of the parties to a suit, send for, 
either from its own records or from any other Court, the record of any other s uit or proceeding, and 
inspect the same.  
(2) Every application made under this rule shall (unless the Court otherwi se directs) be supported 
by an affidavit showing how the record is material to the suit in which the application is made, and 
that the applicant cannot without unreasonable delay or expense obtain a duly authenticated copy of 
the record or of such portion thereof as the applicant requires, or that the production of the original is 
necessary for the purposes of justice.  
(3) Nothing contained in this rule shall be deemed to enable the Court to use in evidence any 
document which under the law of evidence would  be inadmissible in the suit.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 63, for the First proviso (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value b y Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
 124 
 11. Provisions as to documents applied to material objects. —The provisions therein contained as 
to documents shall, so far as may be, apply to all other material objects producible as evidence.  
______  
*[ORDER XIII -A 
Summary Judgment  
1. Scope of and classes of suits to which this Order applies.  —(1) This Order sets out the 
procedure by which Courts may decide a claim pertaining to any Commercial Dispute without recording 
oral evidence.  
(2) For the purposes of this Order, the wor d “claim” shall include —  
(a) part of a claim;  
(b) any particular question on which the claim (whether in whole or in part) depends; or  
(c) a counterclaim, as the case may be.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an application for summary judg ment under this Order 
shall not be made in a suit in respect of any Commercial Dispute that is originally filed as a summary suit 
under Order XXXVII.  
2. Stage for application for summary judgment. —An applicant may apply for summary judgment 
at any time aft er summons has been served on the defendant:  
Provided that, no application for summary judgment may be made by such applicant after the Court 
has framed the issues in respect of the suit.  
3. Grounds for summary judgment. —The Court may give a summary judg ment against a plaintiff 
or defendant on a claim if it considers that –– 
 (a) the plaintiff has no real prospect of succeeding on the claim or the defendant has no real 
prospect of successfully defending the claim, as the case may be; and  
(b) there is no o ther compelling reason why the claim should not be disposed of before recording 
of oral evidence.  
4. Procedure. —(1) An application for summary judgment to a Court shall, in addition to any other 
matters the applicant may deem relevant, include the matters set forth in sub -clauses ( a) to ( f) mentioned 
hereunder: —  
(a) the application must contain a statement that it is an application for summary judgment made 
under this Order;  
(b) the application must precisely disclose all material facts and identify the po int of law, if any;  
(c) in the event the applicant seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence, the applicant must, ––  
(i) include such documentary evidence in its application, and  
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which t he applicant relies;  
(d) the application must state the reason why there are no real prospects of succeeding on the 
claim or defending the claim, as the case may be;  
(e) the application must state what relief the applicant is seeking and briefly state th e grounds for 
seeking such relief.  
(2) Where a hearing for summary judgment is fixed, the respondent must be given at least thirty days’ 
notice of: —  
(a) the date fixed for the hearing; and  
(b) the claim that is proposed to be decided by the Court at such  hearing.  
(3) The respondent may, within thirty days of the receipt of notice of application of summary 
judgment or notice of hearing (whichever is earlier), file a reply addressing the matters set forth in clauses 
(a) to ( f) mentioned hereunder in additio n to any other matters that the respondent may deem relevant: —  
(a) the reply must precisely –– 
(i) disclose all material facts;  
(ii) identify the point of law, if any; and  125 
 (iii) state the reasons why the relief sought by the applicant should not be granted ;  
(b) in the event the respondent seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence in its reply, the 
respondent must —  
(i) include such documentary evidence in its reply; and  
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which the respond ent 
relies;  
(c) the reply must state the reason why there are real prospects of succeeding on the claim or 
defending the claim, as the case may be;  
(d) the reply must concisely state the issues that should be framed for trial;  
(e) the reply must identif y what further evidence shall be brought on record at trial that could not 
be brought on record at the stage of summary judgment; and  
(f) the reply must state why, in light of the evidence or material on record if any, the Court should 
not proceed to summ ary judgment.  
5. Evidence for hearing of summary judgment. —(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the 
respondent in an application for summary judgment wishes to rely on additional documentary evidence 
during the hearing, the respondent must: —  
(a) file such documentary evidence; and  
(b) serve copies of such documentary evidence on every other party to the application at least 
fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the applicant for summary j udgment wishes to rely on 
documentary evidence in reply to the defendant’s documentary evidence, the applicant must: — 
(a) file such documentary evidence in reply; and  
(b) serve a copy of such documentary evidence on the respondent at least five days prior  to the 
date of the hearing.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, sub -rules ( 1) and ( 2) shall not require documentary 
evidence to be: —  
(a) filed if such documentary evidence has already been filed; or  
(b) served on a party on whom it has alread y been served.  
6. Orders that may be made by Court. —(1) On an application made under this Order, the Court 
may make such orders that it may deem fit in its discretion including the following: — 
(a) judgment on the claim;  
(b) conditional order in accordanc e with Rule 7 mentioned hereunder;  
(c) dismissing the application;  
(d) dismissing part of the claim and a judgment on part of the claim that is not dismissed;  
(e) striking out the pleadings (whether in whole or in part); or  
(f) further directions to pro ceed for case management under Order XV -A.  
(2) Where the Court makes any of the orders as set forth in sub -rule ( 1) (a) to ( f), the Court shall 
record its reasons for making such order.  
7. Conditional order. —(1) Where it appears to the Court that it is p ossible that a claim or defence 
may succeed but it is improbable that it shall do so, the Court may make a conditional order as set forth in 
Rule 6 ( 1) (b). 
(2) Where the Court makes a conditional order, it may: —  
(a) make it subject to all or any of the f ollowing conditions: —  
(i) require a party to deposit a sum of money in the Court;  
(ii) require a party to take a specified step in relation to the claim or defence, as the case may 
be; 
(iii) require a party, as the case may be, to give such security or pr ovide such surety for 
restitution of costs as the Court deems fit and proper;  126 
 (iv) impose such other conditions, including providing security for restitution of losses that 
any party is likely to suffer during the pendency of the suit, as the Court may dee m fit in its 
discretion; and  
(b) specify the consequences of the failure to comply with the conditional order, including 
passing a judgment against the party that have not complied with the conditional order.  
8. Power to impose costs. —The Court may make a n order for payment of costs in an application for 
summary judgment in accordance with the provisions of sections 35 and 35A of the Code. ] 
 
______  
ORDER XIV  
Settlement of Issues and Determination of Suit on  
Issues of Law or on Issues agreed upon  
1. Framin g of issues. —(1) Issues arise when a material proposition of fact or law is affirmed by the 
one party and denied by the other.  
(2) Material propositions arc those propositions of law or fact which a plaintiff must allege in order to 
show a right to sue or a defendant must allege in order to constitute his defence.  
(3) Each material proposition affirmed by one party and denied by the other shall form the subject of 
distinct issue.  
(4) Issues ar e of two kinds:  
(a) issues of fact,  
(b) issues of law.  
(5) At the  first hearing of the suit the Court shall, after reading the plaint and the written statements if 
any, and 1[after examination under rule 2 of Order X and after hearing the parties or their pleaders], 
ascertain upon what material propositions of fact or o f law the parties ar e at variance, and shall thereupon 
proceed to frame and record the issues on which the right decision of the case appears to depend.  
(6) Nothing is this rule requires the Court to frame and record issued where the defendant at the first  
hearing of the suit makes no defence.  
2[2. Court to pronounce judgment on all issues. —(1) Notwithstanding that a case may be disposed 
of on a preliminary issue, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of sub -rule ( 2), pronounce judgment 
on all issues.  
(2) Where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit, and the Court is of opinion that the case or 
any part thereof may be disposed of on an issue of law only, it may try that issue first if the issue relates to — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Cour t, or 
 (b) a bar to the suit created by any law for the time being in force,  
and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settlement of the other issues until after that issue 
has been determined, and may deal with the suit in accordance with t he decision on that issue.]  
3. Materials from which issues may be framed. —The Court may frame the issues from all or any 
of the following materials: — 
(a) allegations made on oath by the parties, or by any persons present on their behalf, or made by 
the ple aders of such parties;  
(b) allegations made in the pleadings or in answers to interrogatories delivered in the suit;  
(c) the contents of documents produced by either party.  
4. Court may examine witnesses or documents before framing issues. —Where  the Court is of 
opinion that the issues cannot be correctly framed without the examination of some person not before the 
Court or without the inspection of some document not, produced in the suit, it 3[may adjourn the framing 
of issues to a day not later than seven days] and may (subject to any law for the time being in force) 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 64,  for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by  s. 64 , ibid., for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 24, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002). 127 
 compel the attendance of any person or the production of any document by the person in whose 
possession or power it is by summons or other process.  
1[5. Power to amend and strike out, issues. —(1) The Court may at any time before passing a decree 
amend the issues or frame additional issues on such terms as it thinks fit, and all such amendments or 
additional issues as may be necessary for determining the matters in controversy between the parties  shall 
be so made or framed.  
(2) The Court may also, at any time before passing a decree, strike out any issues that appear to it to 
be wrongly framed or introduced.]  
6. Questions of fact or law may by agreement be stated in form of issues. —(1) Where the p arties 
to a suit are agreed as to the question of fact or of law to be decided between them, they may state the 
same in the form of an issue, and enter into an agreement in writing that, upon the finding of the Court in 
the affirmative or the negative or s uch issue, — 
(a) a sum of money specified in the agreement or to be ascertained by the Court, or in such 
manner as the Court may direct, shall be paid by one of the parties to the other of them, or that one of 
them be declared entitled to some right or subj ect some liability specified in the agreement;  
(b) some property specified in the agreement and in dispute in the suit shall be delivered by one 
of the parties to the other of them, or as that other may direct; or  
(c) one or more of the parties shall do or  abstain from doing some particular act specified in the 
agreement and relating to the matter in dispute.  
7. Court, if satisfied that agreement was executed in good faith, may pronounce judgment. — 
Where the Court is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it deems proper, —  
(a) that the agreement was duly exe cuted by the parties,  
(b) that they have a substantial interest in the decision of such question as aforesaid, and  
(c) that the same is fit to be tried and decided,  
it shall proceed to record and try th e issue and state its finding or decision thereon in the same manner as 
if the iss ue had been framed by the Court;  
and shall, upon the finding or decision on such issue, pronounce judgment according to the terms of 
the agreement; and, upon the judgment so pronounced , a decree shall follow.  
______  
*[ORDER XV  
Disposal of the Suit at the first hearing  
1. Parties not at issue. —(1) Where at the first hearing of a suit it appears that the parties are not at 
issue on any question of law or of fact, the Court may a t once pronounce judgment.  
2. One of several defendants not at issue. —2[(1) Where there are more defendants than one, and any 
one of the defendants is not at issue with the plaintiff on any question of law or of fact, the Court may at once 
pronounce judgme nt for or against such defendant and the suit shall proceed only against the other 
defendants.]  
3[(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, decree shall be drawn up in accordance with 
such judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which t he judgment was pronounced.]  
3. Parties at issue. —(1) Where the parties are at issue on some question of law or of fact, and issues 
have been framed by the Court as hereinbefore provided, if the Court is satisfied that no further argument 
or evidence that the parties can at once adduce is required upon such of the issues as may be sufficient for 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 11, for rule 5 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Rule 2 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 65 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 65, ibid. (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified va lue by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
 128 
 the decision of the suit, and that no injustice will result from proceeding with the suit forthwith , the Court 
may proceed to determine such issues, and, if the fin ding thereon is sufficient for the decision, may 
pronounce judgment accordingly, whether the summons has been issued for the settlement of issues only 
or for the final disposal of the suit:  
Provided that, where the summons has been issued for the settlemen t of issues only, the parties or their 
pleaders are present and none of them objects.  
(2) Where the finding is not sufficient for the decision, the Court shall postpone the further hearing of 
the suit, and shall fix a day for the production of such further  evidence, or for such further argument as 
the case requires.  
4. Failure to produce evidence. —Where the summons has been issued for the final disposal of the 
suit and either party fails without sufficient cause to produce the evidence on which he relies, t he Court 
may at once pronounce judgment, or may, if it thinks fit, after framing and recording issues, adjourn the 
suit for the production of such evidence as may be necessary for its decision upon such issues. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XV.— In the First  Schedule,  in Order  XV, for the existing  rule 5, the following  
rule shall  be substituted,  namely  :— 
“5. Striking off defense on failure to deposit admitted rent,  etc. — (1) In any suit by a 
lessor for the eviction of a lessee after the  determination  of his lease  and  for the recovery  from  
him  of rent  or compensation for use  and occupation,  the defendant  shall,  at  or  before  the first  
hearing  of the suit,  deposit  the entire  amount  admitted  by him  to be due  together with 
interest thereon  at the rate  of nine per centum  per annum  and  whether  or not he admits  any  
amount  to  be  due,  he  shall  throughout  the continuation  of the suit  regularly  deposit  the  
monthly  amount due  within a  week from the date of its accrual,  and in  the event  of any  default  
in making  the deposit  of the entire  amount  admitted  by him  to be  due  or  the  monthly  amount  
due  as  aforesaid,  the court  may  subject  to the provisions  of sub-rule  (2), strike  off his defense.  
“Explanation  1  —  The  expression  ‘first  hearing’  means  the  date  for filing  written  
statement  or for hearing  mentioned  in the summons  or where  more  than one  of such dates 
are  mentioned, the  last  of the dated  mentioned.  
“Explanation 2 — The expression ‘entire amount admitted by  him  to be  due’ m eans  
the entire  gross amount,  whether as  rent or  compensation  for use and  occupation,  
calculated  at the admitted  rate  of rent  for the admitted  period  of arrears  after  making  no 
other  deduction  except  the taxes,  if any,  paid  to a local  authority  in respect  of the building 
on lessor’s account and the amount, if any, deposited in  any court under section 30 of the U. 
P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of  Letting,  Rent  and  Eviction)  Act,  1972.  
“Explanation  3  —  The  expression  ‘monthly  amount  due’  means  the amo unt due  
every month,  whether as  rent or compensation  for use and  occupation  at the admitted  rate  of  
rent,  after  making  no  other deductions  except the taxes, if  any,  paid to  a local authority  in 
respect  of the building  on lessor’s  account.  
(2) Before  making an order  for striking  off  defense,  the  court  may consider any 
representation made by the defendant in that behalf  provided  such  representation  is made  within  10  
days,  of  the  first  hearing or,  of  the  expiry  of the  week referred to in sub -section (1),  as  the case 
may be. 
(3) The amount  deposited  under  this rule may at any time  be withdrawn  by the plaintiff  ; 
Provided  that  such  withdrawal  shall  not have  the effect  of prejudicing  any  claim  by the 
plaintiff  disputing  the correctness  of the amount  deposited  ; 
Provided  further  that  if  the  amount  deposited  includes  any  sums  claimed  by the 
depositor  to be deductible  on  any  account,  the  court  may  require  the  plaintiff  to  furnish 129 
 security for such sum before  he is allowed  to withdraw  the same.”  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 7]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of new rule in Order XV Schedule 1 of 1908 .-- In the First  Schedule  to the said Code,  
in Order  XV, after  rule 4, the following  rule shall  be inserted,  namely  ; 
“5. Striking  off defense on non-deposit  of admitted  rent,  etc.--(1) In any suit by a 
lessor  for the eviction  of a lessee  from  any immovable  property  after  the  
determination  of  his  lease,  and  for  the recovery  from  him of rent in respect  of the 
period  of occupation  thereof  during the continuance  of the  lease, or of  compensation 
for the  use or occupation  thereof,  whether  instituted  before  or after  the commencement 
of the  Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws Amendment Act, 1972,  the defendant  shall, at or before  
the  first hearing  of th e suit (or in the  case of a suit  instituted before  the commencement  
of  the said  Act,  the  first hearing after such commencement), deposit  the entire  amount 
of rent,  or compensation  for use and occupation,  admitted  by  him  to  be  due, and 
thereafter  throughout  the continuance  of the suit, deposit  regularly  the amount  of 
monthly  rent,  or compensation  for use and occupation,  due at the rate admitted  by him,  
and in the event  of  any  default  in this regard,  the Court  may,  unless  after  considering  
any repres entation  made  by him in  that  behalf  it  allows  him  further  time  on security  
being  furnished  for the amount,  refuse  to entertain  any defense  or, as the case may be, 
strike -off his defense.  
(2) The provisions  of this rule are in addition  to and not in derogation  of anything  
contained  in rule 10 of Order  XXXIX.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 1972, s. 7 ] 
______  
*[ORDER XV -A 
Case Management  Hearing  
1. First Case Management Hearing. —The Court shall hold the first Case Management Hearing, not 
later than four  weeks from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial of documents by all parties 
to the suit.  
2. Orders to be passed in a Case Management Hearing. —In a Case Management Hearing, after 
hearing the parties, and once it finds that there are issu es of fact and law which require to be tried, the 
Court may pass an order –– 
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order XIV of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , after examining pleadings, documents and documents produc ed before 
it, and on examination conducted by the Court under Rule 2 of Order X, if required;  
(b) listing witnesses to be examined by the parties;  
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of evidence to be filed by parties;  
(d) fixing the date on which evid ence of the witnesses of the parties to be recorded;  
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed before the Court by the parties;  
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the Court; and  
(g) setting time limits fo r parties and their advocates to address oral arguments.  
3. Time limit for the completion of a tri al.—In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of 
Rule 2 of this Order, the Court shall ensure that the arguments are closed not later than six months from 
the date of the first Case Management Hearing.  
4. Recording of oral evidence on a day -to-day b asis.—The Court shall, as far as possible, ensure 
that the recording of evidence shall be carried on, on a day -to-day basis until the cross -examinatio n of all 
the witnesses is complete.  130 
 5. Case Management Hearings during a trial. —The Court may, if necessary, also hold Case 
Management Hearings anytime during the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence by 
the parties to the dates fixed  under Rule 2 and facilitate speedy disposal of the suit.  
6. Powers of the Court in a Case Management Hearing. —(1) In any Case Management Hearing 
held under this Order, the Court shall have the power to —  
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decid e any pending application filed by the parties 
under Order XIII -A; 
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings relevant and necessary for 
framing issues;  
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice, direction or Co urt order if it finds 
sufficient reason to do so;  
(d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason to do so;  
(e) direct a party to attend the Court for the purposes of examination under Rule 2 of Order X;  
(f) consolidate proceedings;  
 (g) strike off the name of any witness or evidence that it deems irrelevant to the issues framed;  
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue;  
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried;  
(j) exclude an issue from consideration;  
(k) dismiss or g ive judgment on a claim after a decision on a preliminary issue;  
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a Commission where necessary in accordance with Order 
XXVI;  
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing irrelevant, inad missible or 
argumentative material;  
(n) strike off any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the parties containing irrelevant, 
inadmissible or argumentative material;  
(o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed by the Court for this purpose;  
(p) pass any order relating to the monitoring of recording the evidence by a commission or any 
other authority;  
(q) order any party to file and exchange a costs budget;  
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing t he case and furthering the 
overriding objective of ensuring the efficient disposal of the suit.  
(2) When the Court passes an order in exercise of its powers under this Order, it may —  
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a sum of  money into Court; and  
 (b) specify the consequence of failure to comply with the order or a condition.  
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the Court may direct that the parties also 
be present for such Case Management Hearing, if it is of the view that there is a possibility of settlement 
between the parties.  
7. Adjournment of Case Management Hearing. —(1) The Court shall not adjourn the Case 
Management Hearing for the sole reason that the advocate appearing on behalf of a party is not  present:  
Provided that an adjournment of the hearing is sought in advance by moving an application, the Court 
may adjourn the hearing to another date upon the payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, by the 
party moving such application.  
(2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in this Rule, if the Court is satisfied that there is a justified 
reason for the absence of the advocate, it may adjourn the hearing to another date upon such terms and 
conditions it deems fit.  
 
 
______________________  
*. Shall  be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  131 
  
8. Consequences of non -compliance with orders. — Where any party fails to comply with the order 
of the Court passed in a Case Management He aring, the Court shall have the power to —  
 (a) condone such non -compliance by payment of costs to the Court;  
 (b) foreclose the non -compliant party’s right to file affidavits, conduct cross -examination of 
witnesses, file written submissions, address oral  arguments or make further arguments in the trial, as 
the case may be, or  
 (c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non -compliance is wilful, repeated and the 
imposition of costs is not adequate to ensure compliance.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs). ― 
Insertion of  Order XV -A.—After Order XV of the Code, insert the following Order, namely, - 
 
“ORDER XV -A 
1. First Case Management Hearing. —The court shall hold the first Case Management Hearing, not 
later than four week‘s from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial of documents by all 
parties to the suit.  
2. Orders to be passed in a Case Management Hearing. —In a Case Management Hearing, after 
hearing the parties, and once it finds that there are issues of fact and la w which require to be tried, the 
court may pass an order — 
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order XIV of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) after examining pleadings, documents and documents produced before it, 
and on  examination conducted by the court under Rule 2 of Order X, if required;  
(b) listing witnesses to be examined by the parties;  
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of evidence to be filed by parties;  
(d) fixing the date on which evidence of the witnesses  of the parties to be recorded;  
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed before the court by the parties;  
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the court; and  
(g) setting time limits for parties and their advo cates to address oral arguments.  
3. Time limit for the completion of a trial. —In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of 
Rule 2 of this order, the court shall ensure that the arguments are closed not later than six months from the 
date of t he first Case Management Hearing.  
4. Recording of oral evidence on a day -to-day basis. —The court shall, as far as possible, ensure that 
the record of evidence shall be carried on, on a day -to-day basis until he cross examination of all the 
witnesses is com plete.  
5. Case Management hearings during trial. — The court may, if necessary, also hold Case 
Management Hearings anytime during the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence by 
the parties to the dates fixed under Rule 2 and facilitate s peedy disposal of the suit.  
6. Powers of the court in a Case Management Hearing. —(1) In any Case Management Hearing 
held under this order, the court shall have the power to – 
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decide any pending application filed  by the parties under 
Order XIII -A; 
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings relevant and necessary for framing 
issues;  
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice, direction or court order if it finds 
sufficien t reason to do so;  132 
 (d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason to do so;  
(e) direct a party to attend the court for the purposes of examination under Rule 2 of Order X;  
(f) consolidate proceedings;  
(g) strike off the name of any wi tness or evidence that it deems irrelevant to the issues framed;  
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue;  
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried;  
(j) exclude an issue from consideration;  
(k) dismiss or give judgment on a claim after a decisi on on a preliminary issue;  
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a Commission where necessary in accordance with Order  
 XXVI;  
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing irrelevant, inadmissible or 
argumentative material;  
(n) strike off any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the parties containing irrelevant, 
inadmissible or argumentative material;  
(o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed by the court for this purpose;  
(p) pass any order rela ting to the monitoring of recording the evidence by a commission or any 
other authority;  
(q) order any party to file land exchange a costs budget;  
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing the case and furthering the 
overriding obj ective of ensuring the efficient disposal of the suit.  
(2) When the court passes an order in exercise of its powers under this order, it may – 
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a sum of money into court; and  
(b) specify the con sequence of failure to comply with the order or a condition.  
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the court may direct that the parties also be  
present for such Case Management Hearing, if it is of the view that there is a possibility o f settlement 
between the parties.  
7. Adjournment of Case Management Hearing. —(1) The Court shall not adjourn the Case 
Management Hearing for the sole reason that the advocate appearing on behalf of a party is not present:  
Provided that an adjournment of th e hearing is sought in advance by moving an application, the court 
may adjourn the hearing to another date upon the payment of such costs as the court deems fit, by the 
party moving such application.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, if the court is satisfied that there is a justified 
reason for the absence of the advocate, it may adjourn the hearing to another date upon such terms and 
conditions it deems fit.  
8. Consequences of non -compliance with orders. —Where any party fails to comply with the order 
of the court passed in a Case Management Hearing, the court shall have the power to – 
(a) condone such non -compliance by payment of costs to the court;  
(b) foreclose the non -compliant party's right to file affidavits, conduct cross -examinatio n of witnesses, 
file written submissions, address oral arguments or make further arguments in the trial, as the case may 
be; or  133 
 (c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non -compliance is willful, repeated and the 
imposition of costs is not adequ ate to ensure compliance.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notif ication No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)]  
______  
ORDER XVI  
Summoning and Attendance of Witnesses  
1[1. List of witnesses and summons to witnesses. —(1) On or before such date as the Court may 
appoint, and not later than fifteen days after the date on whi ch the issues are settled, the parties shall 
present in Court a list of witnesses whom they propose to call either to give evidence or to produce 
documents and obtain summonses to such persons for their attendance in Court.  
(2) A party desirous of obtainin g any summons for the attendance of any person shall file in Court an 
application stating therein the purpose for which the witness is proposed to be summoned.  
(3) The Court may, for reasons to be recorded, permit a party to call, whether by summoning thro ugh 
Court or otherwise, any witness, other than those whose names appear in the list referred to in sub -rule ( 1), 
if such party shows sufficient cause for the omission to mention the name of such witness in the said list.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of s ub-rule ( 2), summonses referred to in this rule may be obtained by 
the parties on an application to the Court or to such officer as may be appointed by the 2[Court in this 
behalf within five days of presenting the list of witnesses under sub -rule ( 1).] 
3[1A. Production of witnesses without summons. —A Subject to the provisions of sub -rule ( 3) of 
rule 1, any party to the suit may, without applying for summons under rule 1,  bring any witness to give 
evidence or to produce documents.]  
2. Expenses of witness to be paid into Court on applying for summons. —(1) The party applying for 
a summons shall, before the summons is granted and within a period to be fixed 4[which shall not be later 
than seven days from the date of making applications under sub -rule ( 4) of rule  1] pay into Court such a sum 
of money as appears to the Court to be sufficient to defray the travelling and other expenses of the person 
summoned in passing to and from the Court in which he is required to attend, and for one day's attendance.  
(2) Experts .—In determining the amount payable under this rule, the Court may, in the case of any 
person summoned to give evidence as an expert, allow reasonable remuneration for the time occupied 
both in giving evidence and in performing any work of an expert charac ter necessary for the case.  
(3) Scale of expenses. —Where  the Court is subordinate to a High Court, regard shall be had, in 
fixing the scale of such expenses, to any rules made in that behalf.  
5[(4) Expenses to be directly paid to witnesses. —Where  the summo ns is served directly by the party 
on a witness , the expenses referred to in sub -rule ( 1) shall be paid to the witness by the party or his agent.]  
3. Tender of expenses to witness. —The sum so paid into Court shall be tendered to the person sum -
moned, at th e time of serving the summons, if it can be served personally.  
4. Procedure where insufficient sum paid in. —(1) Where it appears to the Court or to such officer as 
it appoints in this behalf that the sum paid into Court is not sufficient to  cover such expe nses or reasonable 
remuneration, the Court may direct such further sum to be paid to the person summoned as appears to be 
necessary on that account, and, in case of default in payment, may order such sum to be levied by 
attachment and sale of the movable p roperty of the party obtaining the summons, or the Court may 
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 104 of 1976,  s. 66, for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977) . 
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 25, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 66, for rule 1A (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  
5. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999 , s. 25 (w.e.f. 7 -2002).  
6. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 66 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  134 
 discharge the person summoned without requiring him to give evidence; or may both order such levy and 
discharge such person as aforesaid.  
(2) Expenses of witnesses detained more than one day. —Where it is necessary to detain the person 
summoned for a longer period than one day, the Court may, from time to time, order the party at whose 
instance he was summoned to pay into Court such sum as is sufficient to defray the expenses of his detention 
for such further period, and, in default of such deposit being made, may order such sum to be levied by 
attachment and sale of the movable property of such party; or the Court may discharge the person summoned 
without requiring him to give evidence ; or may both  order such levy and discharge such person as aforesaid.  
5. Time, place and purpose of attendance to be specified in summons. —Every summons for the 
atten dance of a person to give evidence or to produce a document shall specify the time and place at 
which he is required to attend , and also whether his attendance is required for the purpose of giving 
evidence or to produce a document or for both purposes; and any particular document, which the person 
summoned is called on to produce shall be described in the  summons with reasonable accuracy.  
6. Summons to produce document. —Any person may be summoned to produce a document, 
without being summoned to give evidence ; and any person summoned merely to produce a document 
shall be deemed to have complied with the sum mons if he causes such document to be produced instead 
of attending person ally to produce the same.  
7. Power to require persons present in Court to give evidence or produce document. —Any 
person present in Court may be required by the Court to give evidenc e or to produce any document then 
and there in his possession or power.  
1[7A. Summons given to the party for service. —(1) The Court may, on the application of any party 
for the issue of a summons for the attendance of any person, permit such party to effec t service of such 
summons on such person and shall, in such a case, deliver the summons to such party for service.  
(2) The service of such summons shall be effected by or on behalf of such party by delivering or 
tendering to the witness personally a copy t hereof signed by the Judge or such officer of the Court as he 
may appoint in this behalf and sealed with the seal of the Court.  
(3) The provisions of rules 16 and 18 of Order V shall apply to a summons personally served under 
this rule as if the person eff ecting service were a serving officer.  
(4) If such summons, when tendered, is refused or if the person served refuses to sign and 
acknowledgement of service or for any reason such summons cannot be served personally, the Court 
shall, on the application of the party, re -issue such summons to be served by the Court in the same 
manner as a summons to a defendant.  
(5) Where a summons is served by a party under this rule, the party shall not be required to pay the 
fees otherwise chargeable for the service of sum mons.]  
8. Summons how served. —Every summons 2[under this Order, not being a summons delivered to a 
party for service under rule 7A,] shall be served as nearly as may be in the same manner as a summons to 
a defendant and the rules in Order V as to proof of service shall apply in the case of all summonses served 
under this rule.  
9. Time for serving summons. —Service  shall in all cases be made a sufficient time before the time 
specified in the summons for the attendance of the person summoned, to allow him a re asonable time for 
preparation and for travelling to the place .at which his attendance is required.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 66 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for ce rtain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  135 
 10. Procedure wh ere witness fails to comply with summons .—1[(1) Where a person has been 
issued either to attend to give evidence or to produce a document, f ails to attend or to produce the 
document in compliance with such summons, the Court — 
(a) shall, if the certificate of the serving officer has not been verified by the affidavit, or i f service 
of the summons has affected  by a party or his agent, or  
(b) may , if the certificate of the serving officer has been so verified , 
examine on oath the serving officer or the party or his agent, as the case may be, who has effected service, 
or cause him to be so examined by any Court, touching the service or non -service of the summons.]  
(2) Where the Court sees reason to believe that such evidence or production is material, and that such 
person has, without lawful excuse, failed to attend or to produce the document in compliance with such 
summons or has intentionally avoi ded service, it may issue a proclamation requiring him to attend to give 
evidence or to produce the document at a time and place to be named therein; and a copy of such 
proclamation shall be affixed on the outer door or other conspicuous part of the house in which he ordinarily 
resides.  
(3) In lieu of or at the time of issuing such proclamation, or at any time afterwards, the Court may, in 
its discretion, issue a warrant, either with or without bail, for the arrest of such person, and may make an 
order for the attachment of his property to such amount as it thinks fit, not exceeding the amount of the 
costs of attachment and of any fine which may be imposed under rule 12:  
Provided that no Court of Small Causes shall make an order for the attachment of immovab le property.  
11.  If witness appears attachment may be withdrawn. —Where,  at any time after the attachment 
of his property, such person appears and satisfies the Court, — 
(a) that he did not, without lawful excuse, fail to comply with the summons or intentio nally avoid 
service, and , 
(b) where he has failed to attend at the time and place named in a proclamation issued under the 
last preceding rule, that he had no notice of such proclamation in time to attend,  
the Court shall direct that the property be releas ed from attachment, and shall make such order as to the 
costs of the attachment as it thinks fit.  
12. Procedure if witness fails to appear. —2[(1)] The Court may, where such person does not appear, 
or appears but fails so to satisfy the Court, impose upon h im such fine not exceeding five hundred rupees 
as it thinks fit, having regard to his condition in life and all the circumstances of the case, and may order 
his property, or any part thereof, to be attached and sold or, if already attached under rule 10, t o be sold for 
the purpose of satisfying all costs of such attachment, together with the amount of the said fine, if any:  
Provided that, if the person whose attendance is required pays into Court the costs and fine aforesaid, 
the Court shall order the prope rty to be released from attachment.  
3[(2) Notwithstanding that the  Court has not issued a proclamation under sub -rule ( 2) of rule 10, nor 
issued a warrant nor ordered attachment under sub -rule ( 3) of that rule, the Court may impose fine under 
sub-rule ( 1) of this rule after giving notice to such person to show cause why the fine should not be 
imposed.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 66. ibid.,  for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Rule 12 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 66 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  136 
 13. Mode of attachment. —The provisions with regard to the attachment and sale of property in the 
execution of a decree shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply to any attachment and sale 
under this Order as if the person whose property is so attached were a judgment -debtor.  
14. Court may of its own accord summon as witnesses strangers to suit. —Subject  to the 
provisions of this Code as to attend ance and appearance and to any law for the time being in force, where 
the Court at any time thinks it necessary 1[to examine any person, including a party to the suit] and not 
called as a witness by a party to the suit, the Court may, of its own motion, ca use such person to be 
summoned as a witness to give evidence, or to produce any document in his possession , on a day to be 
appointed, and may examine him as a witness or require him to produce such document.  
15. Duty of persons summoned to give evidence or  produce document . —Subject as last 
aforesaid, whoever is summoned to appear and give evidence in a suit shall attend at the time and place 
named in the summons for that purpose, and whoever is summoned to produce a document shall either 
attend to produce it, or cause it to be produced, at such time and place.  
16. When they may depart. —(1) A person so summoned and attending shall, unless the Court             
other wise directs, attend at each hearing until the suit has been disposed of.  
(2) On the applicat ion of either party and the payment through the Court of all necessary expenses    
(if any), the Court may require any person so summoned and attending to furnish security to attend at the 
next or any other hearing or until  the suit is disposed of and, in  default of his furnishing such security, 
may order him to be detained in the civil prison.  
17. Application of rules 10 to 13. —The provisions of rules 10 to 13 shall, so far as they are 
applicable, be deemed to apply to any person who having attended in com pliance with a summons 
departs, without lawful excuse, in contravention of rule 16.  
18. Procedure where witness apprehended cannot give evidence or produce document. —Where  
any person arrested under a warrant is brought before the Court in custody and canno t, owing to the 
absence of the parties or any of them, give the evidence or produce the document which he has been 
summoned to give or produce, the court may require him to give reasonable bail or other security for his 
appearance at such time a nd place as  it thinks fit, and, on such bail or security being given, may release 
him, and , in default of his giving such bail or security, may order him to be detained in the civil prison.  
19. No witness to be ordered to attend in person unless resident within certa in limits. —No one 
shall be ordered to attend in person to give evidence unless he resides — 
(a) within the local limits of the Court ’s ordinary jurisdiction, or  
(b) without such limits but at a place less then 2[one hundred] or (where there is railway or st eamer 
communication or other established public conveyance for five -sixths of the distance between the place 
where he resides and the place where the Court is situate) less than 3[five hundred kilometres] distance 
from the court -house:  
4[Provided that wher e transport by air is available between the two places mentioned in this rule and 
the witness is paid the fare by air, he may be ordered to attend in person.]  
20. Consequence of refusal of party to give evidence when called on by Court. —Where  any party 
to a suit present in Court refuses, without lawful excuse, when required by the Court, to give evidence or 
to produce any document then and there in his possession or power, the Court may pronounce judgment 
against him or make such order in relation to the su it as it thinks fit.  
21. Rules as to witnesses to apply to parties summoned. —Where  any party to a suit is required to 
give evidence or to produce a document, the provisions as to witnesses shall apply to him so far as they 
are applicable.  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s . 66, for “fifty” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for “two hundred miles” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. The proviso added,  by s. 66, ibid. ( w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  137 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order XVI. — In the First  Schedule,  in Order  XVI  — 
(a) in  rule 2, —] 
(i) in  sub-rule  (1)  at  the  end,  the  following  proviso  shall  be  inserted , namely  :— 
“Provided,  where  Government  is the party  applying  for  a summons  to a Government servant,  it 
shall not  be necessary  for it  to  make  any such  payment  into court.”  ; 
(ii) sub -rule (4)  as  inserted  by  the  Allahabad  High  Court  shall  be omitted  and after  sub-rule (4) as 
inserted  by the Code  of  Civil  Procedure  (Amendmen t) Act, 1976,  the following  sub-rule shall  be inserted , 
namely  :— 
“(4-A) Allowances, etc. of,  Government  servant  witnesses  to be taxed  as costs — Any  travelling  
and daily  allowances  and the salary,  payable  to a Government  servant  who attends  the Court  to give 
evidence or to produce a document shall, on the amount being certified  by such  witness  be taxable  
as costs.  
“Explanation  1  —  The  travelling  and daily  allowances shall be  in accordance  with the  rules  
governing  such allowances,  applicable  to  the Government  servant  in question.  
“Explanation  2 — The daily  allowance  and salary  of the Government  servant  shall  be  proportionate  
to  the  number  of  days  of  his attendance  required  by the Court.”  ; 
(b) in rule  4, the following  proviso  shall  be inserted , namely  :— 
“Provided that  nothing  in this  rule  shall apply  to  a case  where  the witness  is a Government  
servant  summoned  at the instance  of Government  as a party.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 8] 
______  
1[ORDER XVI -A 
Attendance of witnesses confined or detained in prisons  
1. Definitions. —In this Order, — 
(a) “detained” includes detained under any law providing for preventive detention;  
(b) “prison” includes — 
(i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general or special o rder, 
to be a subsidiary jail; and  
(ii) any reformatory, borstal institution or other institution of a like nature.  
2. Power to require attendance of prisoners to give evidence. —Where  it appears to a Court that 
the evidence of a person confined or detained  in a prison within the State is material in a suit, the Court 
may make an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce that person before the Court to 
give evidence:  
Provided that, if the distance from the prison to the Court -house is mo re than twenty -five kilometers, 
no such order shall be made unless the Court is satisfied that the examination of such person on 
commission will not be adequate.  
3. Expenses to be paid into Court. —(1) Before making any order under rule 2, the Court shall 
require the party at whose instance or for whose benefit the order is to be issued, to pay into Court such 
sum of money as appears to the Court to be sufficient to defray the expenses of the execution of the order, 
including the travelling and other expense s of the escort provided for the witness.  
(2) Where the Court is subordinate to a High Court, regard shall be had, in fixing the scale of such 
expenses, to any rules made by the High Court in that behalf.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 67, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  138 
 4. Power of State Government to exclude certain per sons from the operation of rule 2. —(1) The State 
Government may, at any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub -rule ( 2), by general or special order, 
direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in which he o r they may be 
confined or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains in force, no order made under rule 2, 
whether before or after the date of the order made by the State Government, shall have effect in respect of 
such person or class of person s. 
(2) Before making an order under sub -rule ( 1), the State Government shall have regard to the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds on which, the person or class of persons 
have been ordered to be confined or  detained in prison;  
(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of persons is allowed to 
be removed from the prison; and  
(c) the public interest, generally.  
5. Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order  in certain cases. —Where  the 
person in respect of whom an order is made under rule 2 — 
(a) is certified by the medical officer attached to the prison as unfit to be removed from the prison 
by reason of sickness or infirmity, or  
(b) is under committal for tr ial or under remand pending trial or pending a preliminary 
investigation; or 
(c) is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the time required for                
complying with the order and for taking him back to the prison in which he is confined or detained; or  
(d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government under rule 4 applies,                 
the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court ’s order and shall send to 
the Court a sta tement of reasons for so abstaining.  
6. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody. —In any other case, the officer in charge of the 
prison shall, upon delivery of the Court ’s order, cause the person named therein to be taken to the Court 
so as to be presen t at the time mentioned in such order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody in or 
near the Court until he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to be taken back to the prison 
in which he is confined or detained.  
7. Power to issue commiss ion for examination of witness in prison. —(1) Where it appears to the 
Court that the evidence of a person confined or detained in a prison, whether within the State or elsewhere 
in India, is material in a suit but the attendance of such person cannot be se cured under the preceding 
provisions of this Order, the Court may issue a commission  for the examination of that person in the 
prison in which he is confined or detained.  
(2) The provisions of Order XXVI shall, so far may be, apply in relation to the exami nation on commission of 
such person in prison as they apply in relation to the examination on commission of any other person.]  
______  
ORDER XVII  
Adjournment  
1. Court may grant time and adjourn hearing. —1[(1) The court may, if sufficient cause is shown, 
at any stage of the suit grant time to the parties or to any of them, and may from time to time adjourn the 
hearing of the suit for reasons to be recorded in writing:  
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three time to a party during he aring of 
the suit.]  
(2) Costs of adjournment. —In every such case the Court shall fix a day for the further hearing of the 
suit, and 2[shall make such orders as to costs occasioned  by the adjournment or such higher costs as the 
court deems fit :] 
3[Provided that,—  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 26, for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 68, for the previous proviso (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  139 
 (a) when the hearing of the suit has commenced, it shall be continued from day -to-day until all 
the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds that, for the exceptional 
reasons to be recorded by it, the adjournment of the he aring beyond the following day is necessary.  
(b) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the circumstances are 
beyond the control of that party,  
(c) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not  be a ground for 
adjournment,  
(d) where the illness of a pleader or his inability to conduct the case for any reason, other than his 
being engaged in another Court, is put forward as a ground for adjournment, the Court shall not grant 
the . adjournment unle ss it is satisfied that the party applying for adjournment could not have engaged 
another pleader in time,  
(e) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not present or the party or his 
pleader, though present in Court, is not ready to examine or cross -examine the witness, the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing 
with the examination -in-chief or cross -examination of the witness, as the case may be, by the par ty or 
his pleader not present or not ready as aforesaid.]  
2. Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed. —Where,  on any day to which the hearing of the 
suit is adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to appear, the Court may proceed to dispose of t he suit in 
one of the modes directed in that behalf by Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit.  
1[Explanation .—Where the evidence or a substantial portion of the evidence of any party has already 
been recorded and such party fails to appear on a ny day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the 
Court may , in its discretion proceed with the case as if such party were present.]  
3. Court may proceed notwithstanding either party fails to produce evidence, etc. —Where  any 
party to a suit to whom  time has been granted fails to produce his evidence, or to cause the attendance of 
his witnesses, or to perform any other act necessary to the further progress of the suit, for which time has 
been allowed 2[the Court may, notwithstanding such default,  
(a) if the parties are present, proceed to decide the suit forthwith; or  
(b) if the parties are, or any of them is, absent, proceed under rule 2].  
______  
ORDER XVIII  
Hearing of the suit and examination of witnesses  
1. Right to begin. —The plaintiff has the rig ht to begin unless the defendant admits the facts alleged 
by the plaintiff and contents that either in point of law or on some additional facts alleged by the 
defendant the plaintiff is not entitled to any part of the relief which he seeks, in which case t he defendant 
has the right to begin.  
2. Statement and production of evidence. —(1) On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit or on 
any other day to which the hearing is adjourned, the party having the right to begin shall state his case and 
produce his e vidence in support of the issues which he is bound to prove.  
(2) The other party shall then state his case and produce his evidence (if any) and may then address 
the Court generally on the whole case.  
(3) The party beginning may then reply generally on the  whole case.  
3[(3A) Any party may address oral arguments in a case, and shall, before he concludes the oral argu -
ments, if any, submit if the Court so permits concisely and under distinct headings written arguments in 
support of his case to the Court and s uch written arguments shall form part of the record.  
 (3B) A copy of such written arguments shall be simultaneously furnished to the opposite party.  
                                                      
1. The Explanation  ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 68 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 68 , ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  140 
  (3C) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless the 
Court, for  reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjourment.  
 (3D) The Court shall fix such time -limits for the oral arguments by either of the parties in a case, as it 
thinks fit .] 
 
*[(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior to commencing the oral arguments, submit concisely 
and under distinct headings written arguments in support of his case to the Court and such written 
arguments shall form part of the record.  
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions of the laws being cited in support of 
the arguments and the citations of judgments being relied upon by the party and include copies of such 
judgments being relied upon by the party.  
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished simultaneously to the opposite party.  
(3D) The Court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of arguments, permit the parties to file 
revised written arguments within a period of not more than one week after the date of conclusion of 
arguments.  
(3E) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless the 
Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.  
(3F) It shall be open for the Court to limit the time for oral submissions having regard to the nature 
and complexity of the matter. ] 
1[*    *   *         *                *] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs). — 
In Rule 2, after sub -rule (3), insert the following sub -rules, namely: - 
(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior t o commencing the oral arguments, submit concisely and 
under distinct headings written arguments in support of his case to the court and such written arguments 
shall form part of the record.  
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions o f the laws being cited in support of 
the arguments and the citations of judgments being relied upon by the party and include copies of such 
judgments being relied upon by the party.  
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished simultaneously to  the opposite party.  
(3D) The court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of arguments, permit the parties to file revised 
written arguments within a period of not more than one week after the date of conclusion of arguments.  
(3E) No adjournment shal l be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless the court, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.  
(3F) It shall be open for the court to limit the time for oral submissions having regard  to the nature and 
complexity of the matter.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
3. Evidence where several issues. —Where  there are several issues, the burden of proving some of 
which lies on the other party, the party beginning may, at his option, either produce his  evidence on those 
issues or reserve it by way of answer to the evidence produced by the other party; and, in the latter case, 
the party beginning may produce evidence on those issues after the other party has produced all his 
evidence, and the other party  may then reply specially on the evidence so produced by the party 
beginning; but the party beginning will then be entitled to reply generally on the whole case.  
  
                                                      
1. Sub -rule ( 4) omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  141 
 1[3A. Party to appear before other witnesses. —Where  a party himself wishes to appear as a 
witness, he shall so appear before any other witness on his behalf has been examined, unless the Court, 
for reasons to be recorded, permits him to appear as his own witness at a later stage.]  
2[4. Recording of evidence. —(1) In every case, the examination -in-chief of a witness shall be on 
affidavit and copies thereof shall be supplied to the opposite party by the party who calls him for 
evidence:  
Provided that where documents are filed and the parties rely upon the documents, the proof and admis -
sibility of su ch documents which are filed along with affidavit shall be subject to the orders of the Court.  
*[(1A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is proposed to be led by a party 
shall be filed simultaneously by that party at the time direct ed in the first Case Management Hearing.  
 (1B) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of any witness (including of a witness 
who has already filed an affidavit) unless sufficient cause is made out in an application for that purpose 
and an order, giving reasons, permitting such additional affidavit is passed by the Court.  
 (1C) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the affidavits so filed at any time prior 
to commencement of cross -examination of that witness, without an y adverse inference being drawn based 
on such withdrawal:  
Provided that any other party shall be entitled to tender as evidence and rely upon any admission 
made in such withdrawn affidavit.]  
 (2) The evidence (cross -examination and re -examination) of the witness in attendance, whose 
evidence (examination -in-chief) by affidavit has been furnished to the Court, shall be taken either by the 
Court or by the Commissioner appointed by it:  
Provided that the Court may, while appointing a commission under this sub -rule, consider taking into 
account such relevant factors as it thinks fit.  
(3) The Court or the Commissioner, as the case may be, shall record evidence either in writing or 
mechanically in the presence of the Judge or of the Commissioner, as the case may  be, and where such 
evidence is recorded by the Commissioner he shall return such evidence together with his report in writing 
signed by him to the Court appointing him and the evidence taken under it shall form part of the record of the 
suit. 
(4) The Commis sioner may record such remarks as it thinks material respecting the demeanour of any 
witness while under examination:  
Provided that any objection raised during the recording of evidence before the Commissioner shall be 
recorded by him and decided by the Co urt at the stage of arguments.  
(5) The report of the Commissioner shall be submitted to the Court appointing the commission within 
sixty days from the date of issue of the commission unless the Court for reasons to be recorded in writing 
extends the time.  
(6) The High Court or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of Commissioners 
to record the evidence under this rule.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 69 (w.e.f. 1.2 -1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disput es of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 12, for rule 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e. f. 23-10-2015).  
 
 142 
 (7) The Court may by general or special order fix the amount to be paid as remuneration for the 
services of the Com missioner.  
(8) The provisions of rules 16, 16A, 17 and 18 of Order XXVI, in so far as they are applicable, shall 
apply to the issue, execution and return of such commission under this rule.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs). — 
In Rule 4, a fter sub -rule (1), insert the following sub -rules, namely: - 
(1A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is proposed to be led by a party shall be filed 
simultaneously by that party at the time directed in the first Case Management Heari ng. 
(1B) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of any witness (including of a witness who has 
already filed an affidavit) unless sufficient cause is made out in an application for that purpose and an order, giving 
reasons, permitting such additional affidavit is passed by the court.  
(1C) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the affidavits so filed at any time prior to 
commencement of cross -examination of that witness, without any adverse inference being drawn based on such 
withdrawal:  
Provided that any other party shall be entitled to tender as evidence and rely upon any admission made in such 
withdrawn affidavit.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S. O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
1[ 25. How evidence shall be taken in appealable cases. —In case in which an appeal is allowed, the 
evidence of each witness shall be, —  
(a) taken down in the language of the Court, — 
(i) in writing by, or in the presence and under the personal direction and superintendence of, 
the Judge, or  
(ii) from the dictation of the Judge directly on  a typewriter; or  
(b) if the Judge, for reasons to be recorded, so directs, recorded mechanically in the language of 
the Court in the presence of the Judge.]  
36. When deposition to be interpreted. —Where  the evidence is taken down in a language different 
from that in which it is given, and the witness does not understand the language in which it is taken down, 
the evidence as taken down in writing shall be interpreted to him in the language in which it is given.  
 37. Evidence under section 138. —Evidence  taken down under section 138 shall be in the form 
prescribed by rule 5 and shall be read over and signed and, as occasion may require, interpreted and corrected 
as if it were evidence taken down under that rule.  
38. Memorandum when evidence not taken down by J udge. —Where  the evidence is not taken down 
in writing by the Judge, 4[or from his dictati on in the open Court, or recorded mechanically in his presence,] 
he shall be bound, as the examination of each witness proceeds, to make a memorandum of the substance of 
what each witness deposes, and such memorandum shall be written and signed by the Judge and shall form 
part of the record.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 69, for rule 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. The provisions of rule so far as they relate to the manner of taking evidence, are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oud h, see 
the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 (U. P. Act 4 of 1925), s. 16 (2). 
3. The provisions of rules 6, 7, 8, 9,  so far as they relate to the manner of taking evidence, are not applicable to the Chief Court 
of Oudh, see, s. 16 (2), ibid. 
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 69 (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  143 
 1[39. When evidence may be taken in English. —(1) Where English is not the language of the Court, 
but all the parties to the suit w ho appear in person, and the pleaders of such of the parties as appear by 
pleaders, do not object to having such evidence as is given in English, being taken down in English, the 
judge may so take it down or cause it to be taken down.  
 
(2) Where evidence i s not given in English but all the parties who appear in person, and the pleaders of 
such of the parties as appear by pleaders, do not object to having such evidence being taken down in English, 
the Judge may take down, or cause to be taken down, such evid ence in English.]  
10. Any particular question and answer may be taken down. —The Court may, of its own motion or on 
the application of any party or his pleader, take down any particular question and answer, or any objection to 
any question, if there appears  to be any special reason for so doing.  
211. Questions objected to and allowed by Court . —Where any question put to a witness is objected to by a 
party or his pleader, and the Court allows the same to be put, the Judge shall take down the question, the ans wer, the 
objection and the name of the person making it, together with the decision of the Court thereon.  
12. Remarks on demeanour of witnesses. —The Court may record such remarks as it thinks material 
respecting the demeanour of any witness while under exa mination.  
3[ 113. Memorandum of evidence in unappealable cases. —In cases in which an appeal is not allowed it 
shall not be necessary to take down or dictate or record the evidence of the witnesses at length; but the Judge, as 
the examination of each witnes s proceeds shall make in writing, or dictate directly on the typewriter, or cause to be 
mechanically recorded, a memorandum of the substance of what the witness deposes, and such memorandum shall 
be signed by the Judge or otherwise authenticated, and shall  form part of the record.]  
114. [Judge unable to make such memorandum to record reasons of his inability ] omitted  by the Code of 
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,  1976 (104 of 1976), s. 69 ( w.e.f . 1-2-1977).]  
 115. Power to deal with evidence taken before a nother Judge. —(1) Where a Judge is prevented by death, 
transfer or other cause from concluding the trial of a suit, his successor may deal with any evidence or 
memorandum taken down or made under the foregoing rules as if such evidence or memorandum had be en taken 
down or made by him or under his direction under the said rules and may proceed with the suit from the stage at 
which his predecessor left it.  
(2) The provisions of sub -rule ( 1) shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply to evidence taken 
in a suit transferred under section 24.  
116. Power to examine witness immediately —(1) Where a witness is about to leave the jurisdiction of 
the Court, or other sufficient cause is shown to the satisfaction of the Court why his evidence should be take n 
immediately, the Court may, upon the application of any party or of the witness, at any time after the 
institution of the suit, take the evidence of such witness in manner hereinbefore provided.  
(2) Where such evidence is not taken forthwith and in the p resence of the parties, such notice as the Court 
thinks sufficient, of the day fixed for the examination, shall be given to the parties.  
(3) The evidence so taken shall be read over to the witness, and, if he admits it to be correct, shall be 
signed by him , and the Judge shall, if necessary, correct the same, and shall sign it, and it may then be read at 
any hearing of the suit.  
17. Court may recall and examine witness. —The Court may at any stage of a suit recall any witness 
who has been examined and may (s ubject to the law of evidence for the time being in force) put such questions 
to him as the Court thinks fit.  
17A.  [Production of evidence not previously known or which could not be produced despite due diligence. ] 
omitted  by the Code of Civil Procedure (A mendment) Act , 1999 (46 of 1999), s. 27 (w.e.f.  1-7-2002).  
18. Power of Court to inspect. —The Court may at any stage of a suit inspect any property or thing 
concerning which any question may arise 4[and where the Court inspects any property or thing it sha ll, as soon 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 69 , ibid., for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. The provisions of rules 11, 13 , 14, 15,  so far as they relate to the manner of taking evidence, are not applicable to the Chief 
Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 ( U. P. Act 4 of 1925), s. 16 (2). 
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 69 , for the rule, (w.e .f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by s. 69 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  144 
 as may be practicable, make a memorandum of any relevant facts observed at such inspection and such 
memorandum shall form a part of the record of the suit].  
1[19. Power to get statements recorded on commission. —Notwithstanding  anything containe d in 
these rules, the court may, instead of examining witnesses in open court, direct their statements to be 
recorded on commission under rule 4A of Order XXVI.]  
ORDER XIX  
Affidavits  
1. Power to order any point to be proved by affidavit. —Any Court may at any time for sufficient 
reason order that any particular fact or facts may be proved by affidavit, or that the affidavit of any 
witness may be read at the hearing, on such conditions as the Court thinks reasonable:  
Provided that where it appears to the Cou rt that either party bona fide  desires the production of a 
witness for cross -examination, and that such witness can be produced, an order shall not be made 
authori sing the evidence of such witness to be given by affidavit.  
2. Power to order attendance of d eponent for cross -examination. —(1) Upon any application 
evidence may be given by affidavit, but the Court may, at the instance of either party, order the 
attendance for cross -examination of the deponent.  
(2) Such attendance shall be in Court, unless the de ponent is exempted from personal appearance in 
Court or the Court otherwise directs.  
3. Matters to which affidavits shall be confined. —(1) Affidavits shall be confined to such facts as 
the deponent is able of his own knowledge to prove, except on interlocu tory applications, on which 
statements of his belief may be admitted : provided that the grounds thereof are stated.  
(2) The costs of every affidavit which shall unnecessarily set forth matters of hearsay or argumentative 
matter, or copies of or extracts fr om documents, shall (unless the Court ot herwise directs) be paid by the 
party filing the same.   
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs). — 
In Order XIX of the Code, after Rule 3, insert the following new rules, namely - 
 4. Court may control evide nce.—(1) The court may, by directions regulate the evidence as to issues 
on which it requires evidence and the manner in which such evidence may be placed before the court.  
(2) The court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded in writing, exc lude evidence that 
would otherwise be produced by the parties.  
5. Redacting or rejecting evidence. —A court may, in its discretion, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing — 
(i) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit of examination -in-chief as do not, 
in its view, constitute evidence; or  
     (ii) return or reject an affidavit of examination -in-chief as not constituting admissible evidence.  
6. Format and guidelines of affidavit of evidence. —An affidavit must comply with the form and 
requirements set forth below: — 
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the chronological sequence of, the dates  
and events that are relevant for proving any fact or any other matter dealt with;  
     (b) where the court is of the view that an affidavit is a mere reproduction of the pleadings, or 
contains the legal grounds of any party's case, the court may, by order, strike out the affidavit or such 
parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
 145 
 (c) each paragraph of an affidavit should , as far as possible, be confined to a distinct portion of the 
subject;  
(d) an affidavit shall state — 
(i) which of the statements in it are made from the deponent's own knowledge and which are 
matters of information or belief; and  
(ii) the source for any m atters of information or belief.  
(e) an affidavit should — 
(i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate document (or as one of several 
documents contained in a file);  
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs;  
(iii) have all numbers, including dat es, expressed in figures; and  
(iv) if any of the documents referred to in the body of the affidavit are annexed to the affidavit 
or any other pleadings, give the annexures and page numbers of such documents that are relied 
upon.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir  Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
*[4. Court may control evidence.  —(1) The Court may, by directions, regulate the evidence as to 
issues on which it requires evidence and the manner in which such evidence may be placed before the 
Court.  
(2) The Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be  recorded in writing, exclude evidence that 
would otherwi se be produced by the parties.  
5. Redacting or rejecting evidence.  — A Court may, in its discretion, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing –– 
(i) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit of examination -in-chief as do not, 
in its view, constitute evidence; or  
(ii) return or reject an affidavit of examination -in-chief as not constituting admissible evidence.  
6. Format and guidelines of affidavit of evidence. —An affidavit must com ply with the form and 
requirements set forth below: —  
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the chronological sequence of, the 
dates and events that are relevant for proving any fact or any other matter dealt with;  
(b) where the Court  is of the view that an affidavit is a mere reproduction of the pleadings, or 
contains the legal grounds of any party’s case, the Court may, by order, strike out the affidavit or such 
parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper;  
(c) each paragraph o f an affidavit should, as far as possible, be confined to a distinct portion of 
the subject;  
(d) an affidavit shall state —  
(i) which of the statements in it are made from the deponent’s own knowledge and which are 
matters of information or belief; and  
(ii) the source for any matters of information or belief;  
(e) an affidavit should —  
 
_____________________  
    *. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
 146 
 (i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate document (or as one of several 
documents contained in a file);  
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs;  
 
(iii) have all numbers, including dates, expressed in figures; and  
 
(iv) if any of the documents referred to in the body of the affidavit are annexed to the 
affidavit or any other pleadings, give the annexure s and page numbers of such d ocuments that are 
relied upon.]  
Amendment of Order XIX .—In the Schedule, in Order XIX, in rule 1, for th e existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely: -- 
 “Provided that if it appears to the Cou rt, whether at the instance of either party, or otherwise and 
whether  before or after the filing of such affidavit, that the production of such witness for cross -
examination is necessary and his attendance can be produced, the Court shall  order the attendance of 
such witness, whereupon the witness may be examined, cross -examined and re -examined.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 9]  
______  
ORDER XX  
Judgment and decree  
1[ 21. Judgment when pronounced. —3[(1) The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce 
judgment in an open Court, either at once, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable and when the 
judgment is to be pronounced on some future day, the Court sh all fix a day for that purpose, of which due 
notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders:  
Provided that where the judgment is not pronounced at once, every endeavour shall be made by the 
Court to pronounce the judgment within thirty days from th e date on which the hearing of the case was 
concluded but, where it is not practicable so to do on the ground of the exceptional and extraordinary 
circumstances of the case, the Court shall fix a future day for the pronouncement of the judgment, and 
such d ay shall not ordinarily be a day beyond sixty days from the date on which the hearing of the case 
was concluded, and due notice of the day so fixed shall be given to the parties or their pleaders.]  
*[(1) The Commercial Court, Commercial Division, or Commer cial Appellate Division, as the case 
may be, shall, within ninety days of the conclusion of arguments, pronounce judgment and copies thereof 
shall be issued to all the parties to the dispute through  electronic mail or otherwise.]  
4[(2) Where a written judg ment is to be pronounced, it shall be sufficient if the findings of the Court 
on each issue and the final order passed in the case are read out and it shall not be necessary for the Court 
to read out the whole judgment 5***. 
(3) The judgment may be pronoun ced by dictation in open Court to a shorthand writer if the Judge is 
specially empowered by the High Court in this behalf:  
Provided that, where the judgment is pronounced by dictation in open Court, the transcript of the 
judgment so pronounced shall, after  making such correction therein as may be necessary, be signed by the 
judge, bear the date on which it was pronounced, and form a part of the record.]  
2. Power to pronounce judgment written by judge ’s predecessor. —6[A Judge shall] pronounce a 
judgment writ ten, but not pronounced, by his predecessor.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14, for rule I  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
2. The provisions of rules 1, 3,  4 and 5 are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh , see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 
(U. P. Act 4 of 1925), s. 16 (2). 
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 13, for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002) , Earlier rule 1 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) of that rule 
by Act 104  of 1976, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977 ). 
5. Certain words omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70 for “A Judge may” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977 ). 
*. Shall be applicable to c ommercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
 147 
 23. Judgment to be signed. —The judgment shall be dated and signed by the Judge in open Court at 
the time of pronouncing it and, when once signed, shall not afterwards be altered or added, to save as 
provided by section 152 or on review.  
24. Judgments of Small Cause Courts. —(1) Judgments of a Court of Small Causes need not contain 
more than the points for determination and the decision thereon.  
(2) Judgments of other Courts. —Judgments of other Courts shall contain  a concise statement of the 
case, the points for determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for such decision.  
25. Court to state its decision on each issue. —In suits in which issues have been framed, the Court 
shall state its finding or decision , with the reasons therefor, upon each separate issue, unless the finding 
upon any one or more of the issue is sufficient for the decision of the suit.  
4[5A. Court to inform parties as to where an appeal lies in cases where parties are not 
represented by p leaders. —Except  where both the parties are represented by pleaders, the Court shall, 
when it pronounces its judgment in a case subject to appeal, inform the parties present in Court as to the 
Court to which an appeal lies and the period of limitation for t he filing of such appeal and place on record 
the information so given to the parties.]  
6. Contents of decree. —(1) The  decree shall agree with the judgment it shall contain the number of 
the suit, the 1[names and descriptions of the parties, their registere d addresses,] and particulars of the 
claim, and shall specify clearly the relief granted or other determination of the suit.  
(2) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the suit, and by whom or out of what 
property and in what proportio ns such costs are to be paid.  
(3) The Court may direct that the costs payable to one party by the other shall be set off against any 
sum which is admitted or found to be due from the former to the latter.  
2[6A. Preparation of decree. —(1) Every  endeavour sh all be made to ensure that the decree is drawn 
up as expeditiously as possible and, in any case, within fifteen days from the date on which the judgment 
is pronounced.  
(2) An appeal may be preferred against the decree without filing a copy of the decree an d in such a 
case the copy made available to the party by the court shall for the purposes of rule 1 of Order XLI be 
treated as the decree. But as soon as the decree is drawn, the judgment shall cease to have the effect of a 
decree for the purposes of execu tion or for any other purpose.  
6B. Copies of judgments when to be made available. —Where  the judgment is pronounced, copies of 
the judgment shall be made available to the parties immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment 
for preferring an appeal o n payment of such charges as may be specified in the rule made by the High 
Court.]  
7. Date of decree. —The decree shall bear the day on which the judgment was pronounced, and, when 
the judge has satisfied himself that the decree has been drawn up in accorda nce with the judgment, he 
shall sign the decree.  
8. Procedure where Judge has vacated office before signing decree. —Where  a Judge has vacated 
office after pronouncing judgment but without signing the decree, a decree drawn up in accordance with 
such judgme nt may be signed by his successor or, if the Court has ceased to exist, by the Judge of any 
Court to which such Court was subordinate.  
9. Decree for recovery of immovable property. —Where  the subject -matter of the suit is immovable 
property, the decree shal l contain a description of such property sufficient to identify the same, and where 
such property can be identified by boundaries or by numbers in a record of settlement or survey, the 
decree shall specify such boundaries or numbers.  
10. Decree for deliver y of movable property. —Where  the suit is for movable property, and the 
decree is for the delivery of such property, the decree shall also state the amount of money to be paid as 
an alternative if delivery cannot be had.  
11. Decree may direct payment by ins talments. —(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the 
payment of money, the Court may for any sufficient reason 3[incorporate in the decree, after hearing such 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70, for “names and descriptions of the parties” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 28, for rules 6A and 6B (w. e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  148 
 of the parties who had appeared personally or by pleader at the last hearing, before judgment , an order 
that] payment of the amount decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by instalments, with or without 
interest, notwithstanding anything contained in the contract under which the money is payable.  
(2) Order, after decree , for payment by instal ments. —After  the passing of any such decree the Court 
may, on the application of the judgment -debtor and with the consent of the decree -holder, order that payment 
of the amount decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by instalments on such terms as to the payment of 
interest, the attachment of the property of the judgment -debtor, or the taking of security from him, or 
otherwise, as it thinks fit.  
12. Decree for possession and mesne  profits. —(1) Where a suit is for the recovery of possession of 
immovable  property and for rent or mesne  profits, the Court may pass a decree — 
(a) for the possession of the property;  
1[(b) for the rents which have accrued on the property during the period prior to the institution of 
the suit or directing an inquiry as to such r ent. 
(ba) for the mesne profits or directing an inquiry as to such mesne  profits;]  
(c) directing an inquiry as to rent or  mesne  profits from the institution of the suit until — 
(i) the delivery of possession to the decree -holder,  
(ii) the relinquishment of possession by the judgment -debtor with notice to the decree -holder 
through the Court, or  
(iii) the expiration of three years from the date of the decree,  
whichever , event first occurs.  
(2) Where an inquiry is directed under clause ( b) or clause ( c), a fin al decree in respect of the rent or 
mesne  profits shall be passed in accordance with the result of such inquiry.  
2[12A. Decree for specific performance of contract for the sale or lease of immovable property. —
Where a decree for the specific performance of a contract for the sale or lease of immovable property orders 
that the purchase -money or other sum be paid by the purchaser or lessee, it shall specify the period within 
which the payment shall be made.]  
13. Decree in administration suit. —(1) Where a suit is for an account of any property and for its due 
administration under the decree of the Court, the Court shall, before passing the final decree, pass a 
preliminary decree ordering such accounts and inquiries to be taken and made, and giving such other 
directions as it thinks fit.  
(2) In the administration by the Court of the property of any deceased person, if such property proves 
to be insufficient for the payment in full of his debts and liabilities, the same rules shall be observed as to 
the respective rights of secured and unsecured creditors and as to debts and liabilities provable, and as to 
the valuation of annuities and future and contingent liabilities respectively, as may be in force for the time 
being, within the local limits of the Court in whic h the administration -suit is pending with respect to the 
estates of persons adjudged or declared insolvent; and all persons who in any such case would be entitled 
to be paid out of such property, may come in under the preliminary decree, and make such clai ms against 
the same as they may respectively be entitled to by virtue of this Code.  
14. Decree in pre -emption suit. —(1) Where the Court decrees a claim to pre -emption in respect of a 
particular sale of property and the purchase -money has not been paid into  Court, the decree shall —  
(a) specify a day on or before which the purchase -money shall be so paid, and  
(b) direct that on payment into Court of such purchase -money, together with the costs (if any) 
decrees against the plaintiff, on or before the day refe rred to in clause ( a), the defendant shall deliver 
possession of the property to the plaintiff, whose title thereto shall be deemed to have accrued from 
the date of such payment, but that, if the purchase -money and the costs (if any) are not so paid, the 
suit shall be dismissed with costs.  
(2) Where the Court has adjudicated upon rival claims to pre -emption, the decree shall direct, — 
(a) if and in so far as the claims decreed are equal in decree, that the claim of each pre -emptor 
complying with the provisio ns of sub -rule ( 1) shall take effect in respect of a proportionate share of 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 70, ibid., for cl. (b) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  149 
 the property including any proportionate share in respect of which the claim of any pre -emptor failing 
to comply with the said provisions would, but for such default, have taken ef fect; and  
(b) if and in so far as the claims decreed are different in degree, that the claim of the inferior pre -
emptor shall not take effect unless and until the superior pre -emptor has failed to comply with the 
said provisions.  
15. Decree in suit for dis solution of partnership. —Where  a suit is for the dissolution of a partnership, 
or the taking of partnership accounts, the Court, before passing a final decree, may pass a preliminary 
decree declaring the proportionate shares of the parties, fixing the day on which the partnership shall stand 
dissolved or be deemed to have been dissolved, and directing such accounts to be taken, and other acts to 
be done, as it thinks fit.  
16. Decree in suit for account between principal and agent. —In a suit for  an account o f pecuniary  
transactions between a principal and an agent,  and in any other suit not  hereinbefore provided for, where it is 
necessary, in order to ascertain the amount of money due to or from any party, that  an account should be taken,  
the Court shall, bef ore passing its final decree, pass a preliminary decree directing such accounts to be 
taken as it thinks fit.  
17. Special directions as to accounts. —The Court may either by the decree directing an account to be 
taken or by any subsequent order give special  direction with regard to the mode in which the account is to 
be taken or vouched and in particular may direct that in taking the account the books of account in which the 
accounts in question have been kept shall be taken as prima facie  evidence of the tr uth of the matters therein 
contained with liberty to the parties interested to take such objection thereto as they may be advised.  
18. Decree in suit for partition of property or separate possession of a share therein. —Where  the 
Court passes a decree for t he partition of property or for the separate possession of a share therein, then, — 
(1) if and in so far as the decree relates to an estate assessed to the payment of revenue to the 
Government, the decree shall declare the rights of the several parties inte rested in the property, but 
shall direct such partition or separation to be made by the Collector, or any gazetted subordinate of 
the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance with such declaration and with the 
provisions of section 54;  
(2) if and in so far as such decree relates to any other immovable property or to movable property, 
the Court may, if the partition or separation cannot be conveniently made without further inquiry, 
pass a preliminary decree declaring the rights of the several p arties interested in the property and 
giving such further directions as may be required.  
19. Decree when set -off or counter -claim is allowed. —(1) Where the defendant has been allowed a 
set-off 1[or counter -claim] against the claim of the plaintiff, the dec ree shall state what amount is due to 
the plaintiff and what amount is due to the defendant, and shall be for the recovery of any sum which 
appears to be due to either party.  
(2) Appeal from decree relating to set -off or counter -claim. —Any decree passed in  a suit in which 
a set -off 1[or counter -claim] is claimed shall be subject to the same provisions in respect of appeal to 
which it would have been subject if no set -off 1[or counter -claim] had been claimed.  
(3) The provisions of this rule shall apply wheth er the set -off is admissible under rule 6 of Order VIII 
or otherwise.  
20. Certified copies of judgment and decree to be furnished. —Certified copies of the judgment 
and decree shall be furnished to the parties on application to the Court, and at their expen se. 
______  
2[ORDER XXA  
Costs  
1. Provisions relating to certain items. —Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this 
Code relating to costs, the Court may award costs in respect of, — 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 71, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  150 
 (a) expenditure incurred for the giving of any notice requ ired to be given by law before the 
institution of the suit;  
(b) expenditure incurred on any notice which, though not required to be given by law, has been 
given by any party to the suit to any other party before the institution of the suit;  
(c) expenditure  incurred on the typing, writing or printing of pleadings filed by any party;  
(d) charges paid by a party for inspection of the records of the Court for the purposes of the suit;  
(e) expenditure incurred by a party for producing witnesses, even though not summoned through 
Court; and  
(f) in the case of appeals, charges incurred by a party for obtaining any copies of judgments and 
decrees which are required to be filed along with the memorandum of appeal.  
2. Costs  to be awarded in accordance with the rules ma de by High Court. —The award of Costs 
under this rule shall be in accordance with such rules as the High Court may make in that behalf.]  
______  
ORDER XXI  
Execution of Decrees  and Orders   
Payment under Decree  
1[1. Modes of paying money under decree .—(1) All money, payable under a decree shall be paid as 
follows, namely: — 
(a) by deposit into the court whose duty it is to execute the decree, or sent to that Court by postal 
money order or through a bank; or  
(b) out of Court, to the decree -holder by postal money order or through a bank or by any other 
mode wherein payment is evidenced in writing; or  
(c) otherwise, as the Court which made the decree, directs.  
(2) Where any payments is made under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub -rule ( 1), the judgment -debtor 
shall gi ve notice thereof to the decree -holder either through the Court or directly to him by registered 
post, acknowledgment due.  
(3) Where money is paid by postal money order or through a bank under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of 
sub-rule ( 1), the money order or pa yment through bank, as the case may be, shall accurately state the 
following particulars , namely: — 
(a) the number of the original suit;  
(b) the names of the parties or where there are more than two plaintiffs or more than two 
defendants, as the case may be , the names of the first two plaintiffs and the first two defendants;  
(c) how the money remitted is to be adjusted, that is to say, whether it is towards the principal, 
interest or costs;  
(d) the number of the  execution case of the Court, where such case i s pending; and  
(e) the name and address of the payer.  
(4) On any amount paid under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub -rule ( 1), interest, if any, shall cease to 
run from the date of service of the notice referred to in sub -rule ( 2). 
(5) On any amount paid und er clause ( b) of sub -rule ( 1), interest, if any, shall cease to run from the 
date of such payment:  
Provided that, where the decree -holder refuses to ac cept the postal money order or payment through a 
bank, interest shall cease to run from the date on which  the money was tendered to him, or where he 
avoids acceptance of the postal money order or payment through bank, interest shall cease to run from the 
date on which the money would have been tendered to him in the ordinary course of business of the postal 
authorities or the bank, as the case may be.]  
2. Payment out of Court to decree -holder .—(1) Where any money payable under a decree of any 
kind is paid out of Court, 2[or decree of any kind is otherwise adjusted] in whole or in part to the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  151 
 satisfaction of th e decree -holder, the decree -holder shall certify such payment or adjustment to the Court 
whose duty it is to execute the decree, and the Court shall record the same accordingly.  
(2) The judgment -debtor 2[or any person who has become surety for the judgment -debtor] also may 
inform the Court of such payment or adjustment, and apply to the Court to issue a notice to the decree -
holder to show cause, on a day to be fixed by the Court, why such payment or adjustment should not be 
recorded as certified; and if, af ter service of such notice, the decree -holder fails to show cause why the 
payment or adjustment should not be recorded as certified, the Court shall record the same accordingly.  
1[(2A) No payment or adjustment shall be recorded at the instance of the judgm ent-debtor unless — 
(a) the payment is made in the manner provided in rule 1; or  
(b) the payment or adjustment is proved by documentary evidence; or  
(c) the payment or adjustment is admitted by , or on behalf of, the decree -holder in his reply to the 
notice given under sub -rule ( 2) of rule 1, or before the Court.]  
2(3) A payment or adjustment, which has not been certified or recorded as aforesaid, shall not be 
recogni zed by any Court executing the decree.  
Courts executing decrees  
3. Lands situate in more than  one jurisdiction. —Where  immovable property forms one estate or 
tenure situate within the local limits of the jurisdiction of two or more Courts, any one of such Courts 
may attach and sell the entire estate or tenure.  
4. Transfer to Court of Small Causes. —Where a decree has been passed in a suit of which the value as 
set forth in the plaint did not exceed two thousand rupees and which, as regards its subject -matter, is not 
excepted by the law for the title being in force from the cognizance of either a Pre sidency or a Provincial Court 
of Small Causes, and the Court which passed it wishes it to be executed in Calcutta, Madras 3[or Bombay], 
such Court may send to the Court of Small Causes in Calcutta , Madras 2[or Bombay], as the case may be, the 
copies and ce rtificates mentioned in rule 6; and such Court of Small Causes shall thereupon execute the decree 
as if it had been passed by itself.  
4[5. Mode of transfer. —Where  a decree is to be sent for execution to another Court, the Court which 
passed such decree sha ll send the decree directly to such other Court whether or not such  other  Court is 
situated in the same State, but the Court to which the decree is sent for execution shall, if it has no 
jurisdiction to execute the decree, send it to the Court having such jurisdiction.]  
6. Procedure where Court desires that its own decree shall be executed by another Court. —The 
Court sending a decree for execution shall send — 
(a) a copy of the decree;  
(b) a certificate setting forth that satisfaction of the decree has not b een obtained by execution within 
the jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, or, where the decree has been executed in part, the 
extent to which satisfaction has been obtained and what part of the decree remains unsatisfied; and  
(c) a copy of any  order for the execution of the decree, or, if no such order has been made, a 
certificate to that effect.  
7. Court receiving copies of decree, etc., to file same without proof. —The Court to which a decree 
is so sent shall cause such copies and certificates  to be filed, without any further proof of the decree or 
order for execution, or of the copies thereof, unless the Court, for any special reasons to be recorded 
under the hand of the Judge, requires such proof.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. In the application of the Act to Punjab, s ub-rule ( 3) rep. by the Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1934 (Pun. Act 7 of 1934), 
s. 36.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Bombay or Rangoon”.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for rule 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  152 
 8. Execution of decree or order by Court to w hich it is sent. —Where  such copies are so filed, the 
decree or order may, if the Court to which it is sent is the District Court, be executed by such Court or be 
transferred for execution to any subordinate Court of competent jurisdiction.  
9. Execution by High Court of decree transferred by other Court. —Where  the Court to which the 
decree is sent for execution is a High Court, the decree shall be executed by such Court in the same 
manner as  if it had been passed by such Court in the exercise of its ordinary  original civil jurisdiction.  
Application for execution  
10. Application for execution. —Where  the holder of a decree desires to execute it, he shall apply to 
the Court which passed the decree or to the officer (if any) appointed in this behalf, or if the de cree has 
been sent under the provisions hereinbefore contained to another Court then to such Court or to the proper 
officer thereof.  
11. Oral application. —(1) Where a decree is for the payment of money the Court may, on the oral 
application of the decree -holder at the time of the passing of the decree, order immediate execution 
thereof by the arrest of the judgment -debtor, prior to the preparation of a warrant if he is within the 
precincts of the Court.  
(2) Written application. —Save as otherwise provided by  sub-rule ( 1), every application for the 
execution of a decree shall be in writing , signed and verified by the applicant or by some other person 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case, and shall contain in a 
tabular form the following particulars, namely: —  
(a) the number of the suit;  
(b) the names of the parties;  
(c) the date of the decree;  
(d) whether any appeal has been preferred from the decree;  
(e) whether any, and (if any) what, payment or other adjustment of the matter in controversy has 
been made between the parties subsequently to the decree;  
(f) whether any, and (if any) what, previous applications have been made for the execution of the 
decree, the dates of such applications and their results;  
(g) the a mount with interest (if any) due upon the decree, or other relief granted thereby, together 
with particulars of any cross -decree, whether passed before or after the date of the decree sought to be 
executed;  
(h) the amount of the costs (if any) awarded;  
(i) the name of the person against whom execution of the decree is sought; and  
(j) the mode in which the assistance of the Court is required whether ,— 
(i) by the delivery of any property specifically decreed;  
1[(ii) by the attachment, or by the attachment and  sale, or by the sale without attachment, of 
any property;]  
(iii) by the arrest and detention in prison of any person;  
(iv) by the appointment of a receiver;  
(v) otherwise, as the nature of the relief granted may require.  
(3) The Court to which an applicat ion is made under sub -rule ( 2) may require the applicant to produce 
a certified copy of the decree.  
2[11A. Application for arrest to state grounds. —Where an application is made for the arrest and 
detention in prison of the judgment -debtor, it shall state, or be accompanied by an affidavit stating, the 
grounds on which arrest is applied for.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977) . 153 
 12. Application for attachment of movable property not in judgment -debtor ’s           
possession. —Where an application is made for the attachment of any movable propert y belonging to a 
judgment -debtor but not in his possession, the decree -holder shall annex to the application an inventory of 
the property to be attached, containing a reasonably accurate description of the same.  
13. Application for attachment of immovable property to contain certain particulars. —Where 
an application is made for the attachment of any immovable property belonging to a judgment -debtor, it 
shall contain at the foot —  
(a) a description of such property sufficient to identify the same and, in cas e such property can be 
identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement or survey, a specification of such 
boundaries or numbers; and  
(b) a specification of the judgment -debtor ’s share or interest in such property to the best of the 
belief of the applicant, and so far as he has been able to ascertain the same.  
14. Power to require certified extract from Collector ’s register in certain cases. —Where an 
application is made for the attachment of any land which is registered in the office of the Col lector, the 
Court may require the applicant to produce a certified extract from the register of such office, specifying 
the persons registered as proprietors of, or as possessing any transferable interest in, the land or its 
revenue, or as liable to pay re venue for the land, and the shares of the registered proprietors.  
15. Application for execution by Joint decree -holders. —(1) Where a decree has been passed 
jointly in favour of more pe rsons than one, any one or more of such persons may, unless the decree 
imposes any condition to the contrary, apply for the execution of the whole decree for the benefit of them 
all, or, where any of them has died, for the benefit of the survivors and the legal representatives of the 
deceased.  
(2) Where the Court sees sufficie nt cause for allowing the decree to be executed on an application 
made under this rule, it shall make such order as it deems necessary for protecting the interest of the 
persons who have not joined in the application.  
16. Application for execution by trans feree of decree. —Where a decree or, if a decree has been 
passed jointly in favour of two or more persons, the interest of any decree -holder in the decree is 
transferred by assignment in writing or by operation of law, the transferee may apply for execution  of the 
decree to the Court which passed it; and the decree may be executed in the same manner and subject to 
the same conditions as if the application were made by such decree -holder:  
Provided that, where the decree, or such interest as aforesaid, has bee n transferred by assignment, 
notice of such application shall be given to the transferor and the judgment -debtor, and the decree shall 
not be executed until the Court has heard their objections (if any) to its execution:  
Provided also that, where a decree for the payment of money against two or more persons has been 
transferred to one of them, it shall not be executed against the others.  
1[Explanation. —Nothing in this rule shall affect the provisions of section 146, and a transferee of 
rights in the propert y, which is the subject matter of the suit, may apply for execution of the decree 
without a separate assignment of the decree as required by this rule.]  
17. Procedure on receiving application for execution of decree. —(1) On receiving an application 
for the  execution of a decree as provided by rule 11, sub -rule ( 2), the Court shall ascertain whether such 
of the requirements of rules 11 to 14 as may be applicable to the case have been complied with; and, if 
they have not been complied with, 2[the Court shall allow] the defect to be remedied then and there or 
within a time to be fixed by it.  
2[1A. If the defect is not so remedied, the Court shall reject the application:  
Provided that where, in the opinion of the Court, there is some inaccuracy as to the amount referred to 
in clauses ( g) and ( h) of sub -rule ( 2) of rule 11, the Court shall, instead of rejecting the application, decide 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  154 
 provisionally (without prejudice to the right of the parties to have the amount finally decided in the course 
of the proceedings) t he amount and make an order for the execution of the decree for the amount so 
provisionally decided.]  
(2) Where an application is amended under the provisions of sub -rule ( 1), it shall be deemed to have 
been an application in accordance with law and presen ted on the date when it was first presented.  
(3) Every amendment made under this rule shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.  
(4) When the application is admitted, the Court shall enter in the proper register a note of the 
application and the date on w hich it was made, and shall, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, 
order execution of the decree according to the nature of the application:  
Provided that, in the case of a decree for the payment of money, the value of the property attached 
shall, as nearly as may be, correspond with the amount due under the decree.  
18. Execution in case of cross -decrees. —(1) Where applications are made to a Court for the 
execution of cross -decrees in separate suits for the payment of two sums of money passed bet ween the 
same parties and capable of execution at the same time by such Court, then —  
(a) if the two sums are, equal, satisfaction shall be entered upon both decrees; and  
(b) if the two sums are unequal execution may be taken out only by the holder of the decree for 
the larger sum and for so much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum, and satisfaction for 
the smaller sum shall be entered on the decree for the larger sum as well as satisfaction on the decree 
for the smaller sum.  
(2) This rule shall  be deemed to apply where either party is an assignee of one of the decrees and as 
well in respect of judgment -debts due by the original assignor as in respect of judgment -debts due by the 
assignee himself.  
(3) This rul e shall not be deemed to apply unless —  
(a) the decree -holder in one of the suits in which the decrees have been made is the judgment -
debtor in the other and each party files the same character in both suits; and  
(b) the sums due under the decrees are definite.  
(4) The holder of a decree pass ed against several persons jointly and severally may treat it as a cross -
decree in relation to a decree passed against him singly in favour of one or more of such persons.  
Illustrations  
(a) A holds a decree against B for Rs. 1,000. B holds a decree against  A for payment of Rs. 1,000 in case A fails 
to deliver certain goods at a future day. B cannot treat his decree as a cross -decree under this rule.  
(b) A and B, co -plaintiffs, obtain a decree for Rs. 1,000. against C, and C obtains a decree for Rs. 1,000 ag ainst 
B. C cannot treat his decree as a cross -decree under this rule.  
A obtains a decree against B for Rs. 1,000. C, who is a trustee for B, obtains a decree on behalf of B against A 
for Rs. 1,000. B cannot treat C's decree as a cross -decree under this rul e. 
A, B, C, D and E are jointly and severally li able for Rs. 1,000 under a decree obtained by F. A obtains a decree 
for Rs. 1,000 against F singly and applies for execution to the Court in which the joint -decree is being executed. F  
may treat his joint -decree as cross -decree under this rule . 
19. Execution in case of cross -claims under same decree. —Where application is made to a Court 
for the execution of a decree under which two parties are entitled to recover sums of money from each 
other, then —  
(a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction for both shall be entered upon the decree; and  
(b) if the two sums are unequal, execution may be taken out only by the party entitled to the larger 
sum and for so much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum, and satisfaction for the smaller 
sum shall be entered upon the decree.  
20. Cross -decrees and cross -claims in mortgage  suits. —The provisions contained in rules 18 and 
19 shall apply to decrees for sale in enforcement of a mortgage or charge.  155 
 21. Simultaneous ex ecution. —The Court may, in its discretion, refuse execution at the same time 
against the person and property of the judgment -debtor.  
22. Notice to show cause against execution in certain cases. —(1) Where an application for 
execution is made —  
(a) more than  1[two years] after the date of the decree, or  
(b) against the legal representative of a party to the decree 2[or where an application is made for 
execution of a decree filed under the provisions of section 44A], 3[or] 
4[(c) against the assignee or receive r in insolvency, where the party to the decree has been 
adjudged to be an insolvent ,] 
the Court executing the decree shall issue a notice to the person against whom execution is applied for 
requiring him to show cause, on a date to be fixed, why the decree  should not be executed against him :  
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary in consequence of more than 5[two years] having 
elapsed between the date of the decree and the application for execution if the application is made within     
2[two years]  from the date of the last order against the party against whom execution is applied for, made 
on any previous application for execution, or in consequence of the application being made against the 
legal representative of the judgment -debtor if upon a prev ious application for execution against the same 
person the Court has ordered execution to issue against him.  
(2) Nothing in the foregoing sub -rule shall be deemed to preclude the Court from issuing any process 
in execution of a decree without issuing the n otice thereby prescribed, if, for reasons to be recorded, it 
considers that the issue of such notice would cause unreasonable delay or would defeat the ends of 
justice.  
1[22A. Sale not be set aside on the death of the judgment -debtor before the sale but af ter the service 
of the proclamation of sale. —Where  any property is sold in execution of a decree, the sale shall not be set 
aside merely by reason of the death of the judgment -debtor between the date of issue of the proclamation of 
sale and the date of the  sale notwithstanding the failure of the decree -holder to substitute the legal 
representative of such deceased judgment -debtor, but, in case of such failure, the Court may set aside the sale 
if it is satisfied that the legal representative of the deceased judgment -debtor has been prejudiced by the sale.]  
23. Procedure after issue of notice. —(1) Where the person to whom notice is issued under 6[rule 22] 
does not appear or does not show cause to the satisfaction of the Court why the decree should not be 
execu ted, the Court shall order the decree to be executed.  
(2) Where such person offers any objection to the execution of the decree, the Court shall consider 
such objection and make such order as it thinks fit.  
Process for execution  
24. Process for execution. —(1) When the preliminary measures (if any) required by the foregoing 
rules have been taken, the Court shall, unless it sees cause to the contrary, issue its process for the 
execution of the decree.  
(2) Every such process shall bear date the day on which it  is issued, and shall be signed by the Judge 
or such officer as the Court may appoint in this behalf, and shall be sealed with the seal of the Court and 
delivered to the proper officer to be executed.  
7[(3) In every such process, a day shall be specified o n or before which it shall be executed and a day 
shall also be specified on or before which it shall be returned to the Court, but no process shall be deemed 
to be void if no day for its return is specified therein.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for “one year” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 1937, s. 3.  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “one year” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the second Sch., for “the last preceding rule” (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
7. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for sub -rule ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  156 
 25. Endorsement on process. —(1) The off icer entrusted with the execution of the process shall 
endorse thereon the day on, and the manner in, which it was executed, and, if the latest day specified in 
the process for the return thereof has been exceeded, the reason of the delay, or, if it was no t executed, the 
reason why it was not executed, and shall return the process with such endorsement to the Court.  
(2) Where the endorsement is to the effect that such officer is unable to execute the process, the Court 
shall examine him touching his alleged  inability, and may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine witnesses 
as to such inability, and shall record the result.  
Stay of execution  
26. When Court may stay execution. —(1) The Court to which a decree has been sent for execution 
shall, upon sufficient c ause being shown, stay the execution of such decree for a reasonable time, to enable 
the judgment -debtor to apply to the Court by which the decree was passed, or to any Court having 
appellate jurisdiction in respect of the decree or the execution thereof, for an order to stay execution, or for 
any other order relating to the decree or execution which might have been made by such Court of first 
instance or Appellate Court if execution had been issued thereby, or if application for execution had been 
made the reto. 
(2) Where the property or person of the judgment -debtor has been seized under an execution, the 
Court which issued the execution may order the restitution of such property or the discharge of such 
person pending the result of the application.  
(3) Power to require security from, or impose conditions upon, judgment -debtor. —Before 
making an order to stay execution, or for the restitution of property or the discharge of the judgment -
debtor, 1[the Court shall require] such security from, or impose such con dition upon, the judgment -debtor 
as it thinks fit.  
27. Liability of judgment -debtor discharged. —No order of restitution or discharge under rule 26 
shall prevent the property or person of a judgment -debtor from being retaken in execution of the decree 
sent for execution.  
28. Order of Court which passed decree or of Appellate Court to be binding upon Court applied 
to.—Any order of the Court by which the decree was passed, or of such Court of appeal as aforesaid, in 
relation to the execution of such decree, sh all be binding upon the Court to which the decree was sent for 
execution.  
29. Stay of execution pending suit between decree -holder and judgment -debtors. —Where  a suit is 
pending in any Court against the holder of a decree of such Court 2[or of a decree whic h is being executed 
by such Court, on the part of the person against whom the decree was passed, the Court may, on such terms 
as to security or otherwise, as it thinks fit, stay execution of the decree until the pending suit has been 
decided:  
2[Provided th at if the decree is one for payment of money, the Court shall, if it grants stay without 
requiring security, record its reasons for so doing.] 
Mode of execution  
30. Decree for payment of money. —Every  decree for the payment of money, including a decree for 
the payment of money as the alternative to some other relief, may be executed by the detention in the civil 
prison of the judgment -debtor, or by the attachment and sale of his property, or by both.  
31. Decree for specific movable property. —(1) Where the de cree is for any specific movable, or for 
any share in a specific movable, it may be executed by the seizure, if practicable, of the movable or share, 
and by the delivery thereof to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such person as he appoints to  
receive delivery on his behalf, or by the detention in the civil prison of the judgment -debtor, or by the 
attachment of his property, or by both.  
(2) Where any attachment under sub -rule (1) has remained in force for 3[three months,] if the 
judgment -debtor  has not obeyed the decree and the decree -holder has applied to have the attached 
property sold, such property may be sold, and out of the proceeds the Court may award to the decree -
holder, in cases where any amount has been fixed by the decree to be paid as an alternative to delivery of 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for “the Court may require” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
2. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Su bs. by s. 72, ibid, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   157 
 movable property, such amount, and in other cases, such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay the 
balance (if any) to the judgment -debtor on his application.  
(3) Where the judgment -debtor has obeyed the decree and pa id all costs of executing the same which he 
is bound to pay, or where, at the end of 3[three months] from the date of the attachment, no application to 
have the property sold has been made, or, if made, has been refused, the attachment shall cease . 
32. Dec ree for specific performance for restitution of conjugal rights, or for an  injunction. —   
(1) Where the party against whom a decree for the specific performance of a contract, or for restitution of 
conjugal rights, or for an injunction, has been passed, ha s had an opportunity of obeying the decree and 
has wilfully failed to obey it, the decree may be enforced  1[in the case of a decree for restitution of 
conjugal rights by the attachment of his property or, in the case of a decree for the specific performanc e 
of a contract or for an injunction] by his detention in the civil prison, or by the attachment of his property, 
or by both.  
(2) Where the party against whom a decree for specific performance or for an injunction has been 
passed is a corporation, the decr ee may be enforced by the attachment of the property of the corporation 
or, with the leave of the Court, by the detention in the civil prison of the directors or other principal 
officers thereof, or by both attachment and detention.  
(3) Where any attachmen t under sub -rule (1) or sub -rule (2) has remained in force for 2[six months,] 
if the judgment -debtor has not obeyed the decree and the decree -holder has applied to have the attached 
property sold, such property may be sold; and out of the proceeds the Cour t may award to the decree -
holder such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay the balance (if any) to the judgment -debtor on his 
application.  
(4) Where the judgment -debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all costs of executing the same which 
he is boun d to pay, or where, at the end of 2[six months] from the date of the attachment no application to 
have the property sold has been made, or if made has been refused, the attachment shall cease.  
(5) Where a decree for the specific performance of a contract o r for an injunction has not been obeyed, 
the Court may, in lieu of or in addition to all or any of the processes aforesaid, direct that the act required to 
be done may be done so far as practicable by the decree -holder or some other person appointed by the  
Court, at the cost of the judgment -debtor, and upon the act being done the expenses incurred may be 
ascertained in such manner as the Court may direct and may be recovered as if they were included in the 
decree.  
3[Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, i t is hereby declared that the expression “the act required 
to be done ” covers prohibitory as well as mandatory  injunctions.] 
Illustration  
A, a person of little substance, erects a building which renders uninhabitable a family mansion belonging to B. 
A, in spite of his detention in prison and the attachment of his property, declines to obey a decree obtained against 
him by B and directing him to remove the building. The Court is of opinion that no sum realizable  by the sale of A's 
property would adequately c ompensate B for the depreciation in the value of his mansion. B may apply to the Court 
to remove the building and may recover the cost of such removal from A in the execution -proceedings.  
33. Discretion of Court in executing decrees for restitution of conj ugal rights. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in rule 32, the Court, either at the time of passing a decree 4[against a husband] 
for the restitution of conjugal rights or at any time afterwards, may order that the decree 5[shall be 
executed in the manner provi ded in this ru le.] 
(2) Where the Court has made an order under sub -rule ( 1) 6***, it may order that, in the event of the 
decree not being obeyed within such period as may be fixed in this behalf, the judgment -debtor shall 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1923, s. 2.  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for “one year (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002) . 
4. Ins. by Act 29 of 1923, s. 3.  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “shall not be executed by detention in prison”.  
6. The words “and the decree -holder is the wife” omitted by s. 3, ibid. 158 
 make to the decree -holder such per iodical payments as may be just, and, if it thinks fit, require that the 
judgment -debtor shall, to its satisfaction, secure to the decree -holder such periodical payments.  
(3) The Court may from time to time vary or modify any order made under sub -rule (2) for the periodical 
payment of money, either by altering the times of payment or by increasing or diminishing the amount, or may  
temporarily suspend the same as to the whole or any part of the money so ordered to be paid, and again 
review the same, either w holly or in part as it may think just.  
(4) Any money ordered to be paid under this rule may be recovered as though it were payable under a 
decree for the payment of money.  
34. Decree for execution of document, or endorsement of negotiable instrument .—(1) Where a 
decree is for the execution of a document or for the endorsement of a negotiable instrument and the 
judgment -debtor neglects or refuses to obey the decree, the decree -holder may prepare  a draft of the 
document or endorsement in accordance with the t erms of the decree and deliver the same to the Court.  
(2) The Court shall there upon cause the draft to be served on the judgment -debtor together with a 
notice requiring his objections (if any) to be made within such time as the Court fixes in this behalf.  
(3) Where the judgment -debtor objects to the draft, his objections shall be stated in writing within 
such time, and the Court shall make such order approving or altering the draft, as it thinks fit.  
(4) The decree -holder shall deliver to the Court a copy of the draft with such alterations (if any) as the 
Court may have directed upon the proper stamp -paper if a stamp is required by the law for the time being 
in force; and the Judge or such officer as may be appointed in this behalf shall execute the documen t so 
delivered.  
(5) The execution of a document or the endorsement of a negotiable instrument under this rule may 
be in the following form, namely: —  
“C. D., Judge of the Court of,  
(or as the case may be ), for A. B., in a suit by E. F against A. B. ”, 
and s hall have the same effect as the execution of the document or the endorsement of the negotiable 
instrument by the party ordered to execute or endorse the same.  
1[(6) (a) Where the registration of the document is required under any law for the time being in  force, 
the Court, or such officer of the Court as may be authorised in this behalf by the Court, shall cause the 
document to be registered in accordance with such law.  
(b) Where the registration of the document is not so required, but the decree -holder de sires it to be 
registered, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit.  
(c) Where the Court makes any order for the registration of any document, it may make such order as 
it thinks fit as to the expenses of registration.]  
35. Decree for immovable prope rty.—(1) Where a decree is for the delivery of any immovable 
property, possession thereof shall be delivered to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such 
person as he may appoint to receive delivery on his behalf, and, if necessary, by removing an y person 
bound by the decree who refuses to vacate the property.  
(2) Where a decree is for the joint possession of immovable property, such possession shall be 
delivered by affixing a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the property and procla iming by 
beat of drum, or other customary mode, at some convenient place, the substance of the decree.  
(3) Where possession of any building on enclosure is to be delivered and the person in possession, 
being bound by the decree, does not afford free access , the Court, through its officers, may, after giving 
reasonable warning and facility to any woman not appearing in public according to the customs of the 
country to withdraw, remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door or do any other act 
necess ary for putting the decree -holder in possession.  
36. Decree for delivery of immovable property when in occupancy of tenant .—Where a decree is for 
the delivery of any immovable property in the occupancy of a tenant or other person entitled to occupy the 
same and not bound by the decree to relinquish such occupancy, the Court shall order delivery to be made by 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for sub -rule ( 6) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  159 
 affixing a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to the occupant by 
beat of drum or other customary mode, at s ome convenient place, the substance of the decree in regard to the 
property.  
37. Discretionary power to permit judgment -debtor to show cause against detention in 
prison. —(1) Notwithstanding anything in these rules, where an application is for the execution  of a 
decree for the payment of money by the arrest and detention in the civil prison of a judgment -debtor who 
is liable to be arrested in pursuance of the application, the Court 1[shall], instead of issuing a warrant for 
his arrest, issue a notice calling  upon him to appear before the Court on a day to be specified in the notice 
and show cause why he should not be committed to the civil prison:  
2[Provided that such notice shall not be necessary if the Court is satisfied, by affidavit, or otherwise, 
that, w ith the object or effect of delaying the execution of the decree, the judgment -debtor is likely to 
abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court.] 
(2) Where appearance is not made in obedience to the notice, the Court shall, if the dec ree-holder so 
requires, issue a warrant for the arrest of the judgment -debtor . 
38. Warrant for arrest to direct judgment -debtor to be brought up.—Every warrant for the 
arrest of a judgment -debtor shall direct the officer entrusted with its execution to bri ng him before the 
Court with all convenient speed, unless the amount which he has been ordered to pay, together with the 
interest thereon and the costs (if any) to which he is liable, be sooner paid.  
39. Subsistence allowance. —(1) No judgment -debtor shall be arrested in execution of a decree 
unless and until the decree -holder pays into Court such sum as the Judge thinks sufficient for the 
subsistence of the judgment -debtor from the time of his arrest until he can be brought before the Court.  
(2) Where a jud gment -debtor is committed to the civil prison in execution of a decree, the Court 
shall fix for his subsistence such monthly allowance as he may be entitled to according to the scales fixed 
under section 57, or, where no such scales have been fixed, as it considers sufficient with reference to the 
class to which he belongs.  
(3) The monthly allowance fixed by the Court shall be supplied by the party on whose application the 
judgement -debtor has been arrested by monthly payments in advance before the first da y of each month.  
(4) The first payment shall be made to the proper officer of t he Court for such portion of the current 
month as remains unexpired before the judgment -debtor is committed to the civil prison, and the 
subsequent payments (if any) shall be ma de to the officer in charge of the civil prison.  
(5) Sums disbursed by the decree -holder for the subsistence of the judgment -debtor in the civil 
prison shall be deemed to be costs in the suit :  
Provided that the judgment -debtor shall not be detained in the  civil prison or arrested on account of 
any sum so disbursed.  
3[40. Proceedings on appearance of judgment -debtor in obedience to notice or after arrest. —(1) 
When a judgment -debtor appears before the Court in obedience to a notice issued under rule 37, or i s brought 
before the Court after being arrested in execution of a decree for the payment of money, the Court shall 
proceed to hear the decree -holder and take all such evidence as may be produced by him in support of his 
application for execution and shall then give the judgment -debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he 
should not be committed to the civil prison.  
(2) Pending the conclusion of the inquiry under sub -rule ( 1) the Court may, in its discretion, order the 
judgment -debtor to be detained in the  custody of an officer of the Court or release him on his furnishing 
security to the satisfaction of the Court for his appearance when required.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1936, s. 3, for “may”.  
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid. 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for rule 40.  160 
 (3) Upon the conclusion of the inquiry under sub -rule ( 1) the Court may, subject to the provisions of 
section 5 1 and to the other provisions of this Code, make an order for the detention of the judgment -
debtor in the civil prison and shall in that event cause him to be arrested if he is not already under arrest:  
Provided that in order to give the judgment -debtor an  opportunity of satisfying the decree, the Court 
may, before making the order of detention, leave the judgment -debtor in the custody of an officer of the 
Court for a specified period not exceeding fifteen days or release him on his furnishing security to t he 
satisfaction of the Court for his appearance at the expiration of the specified period if the decree be not 
sooner satisfied.  
(4) A judgment -debtor released under this rule may be re -arrested.  
(5) When the Court does not make an order of detention under  sub-rule ( 3) it shall disallow the 
application and, if the judgment -debtor is under arrest, direct his release.]  
Attachment of property  
41. Examination of judgment -debtor as to his property. —1[(1)] Where a decree is for the payment 
of money the decree -holder may apply to the Court for an order that —  
(a) the judg ment-debtor, or  
(b) 2[where  the judgment -debtor is a corporation], any officer thereof, or  
(c) any other person,  
be orally examined as to whether any or what debts are owing to the judgment -debtor and whether the 
judgment -debtor has any and what other property or means of satisfying the decree; and the Court may 
make an order for the attendance and examination of such judgment -debtor, or officer or other person, 
and for the production of any books o r documents.  
3[(2) Where a decree for the payment of money has remained unsatisfied for a period of thirty days, 
the Court may, on the application of the decree -holder and without prejudice to its power under sub -rule 
(1), by order require the judgment -debtor or where the judg ment-debtor is a corporation, any officer 
thereof, to make an affidavit stating the particulars of the assets of the judgment -debtor.  
(3) In case of disobedience of any order made under sub -rule (2), the Court making the order, or any 
Court to which the proceeding is transferred, may direct that the person disobeying the order be detained 
in the civil prison for a term not exceeding three months unless before the expiry of such term the Court 
directs his release.]  
42. Attachment in case  of decree for rent or mesne  profits  or other matter, amount of which to 
be subsequently determined. —Where  a decree directs an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits or any other 
matter, the property of the judgment -debtor may, before the amount due from him has been ascertained, 
be attached, as in the case of an ordinary decree for the payment of money.  
43. Attachment of movable property, other than agricultural produce, in possession of 
judgment -debtor. —Where  the property to be attached is movable property o ther than agricultural 
produce, in the possession of the judg ement -debtor, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure, and 
the attaching officer shall keep the property in his own custody or in the custody of one of his 
subordinates, and shall be respo nsible for the due custody thereof :  
Provided that, when the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay, or when the expense 
of keeping it in custody is likely to exceed its value, the attaching officer may sell it at once.  
                                                      
1. Rule 41 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “in the case of a corporation” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  161 
 3[43A . Custody of mo vable property. —(1) Where the property attached consists of live -stock, agricultural 
implements or other articles which cannot conveniently be removed and the attaching officer does not act under 
the proviso to rule 43, he may, at the instance of the judgm ent-debtor or of the decree holder or of any           
other person claiming to be interested in such property, leave it in the village or place where it has been 
attached, in the custody of any respectable person (hereinafter referred to as the “custodian ”). 
(2) If the custodian fails, after due notice, to produce such property at the place named by the Court 
before the officer deputed for the purpose or to restore it to the person in whose favour restoration is 
ordered by the Court, or if the property, tho ugh so produced or restored, is not in the same condition as it 
was when it was entrusted to him, —  
(a) the custodian shall be liable to pay compensation to the decree -holder, judgment -debtor or any 
other person who is found to be entitled to the restorati on thereof, for any loss or damage caused by 
his default; and  
(b) such liability may be enforced —  
(i) at the instance of the decree -holder, as if the custodian were a surety under section 145;  
(ii) at the instance of the judgement -debtor or such other per son, on an application in 
execution; and  
(c) any order determining such liability shall be appealable as a decree.]  
44. Attachment of agricultural produce. —Where  the property to be attached is agricultural 
produce, the attachment shall be made by affixing a copy of the warrant of attachment, —  
(a) where such produce is a growing crop, on the land on which such crop has grown, or  
(b) where such produce has been cut or gathered, on the threshing floor or place for treading out 
grain or the like or fodder -stack on or in which it is deposited,  
and another copy on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part of the house in which the 
judgment -debtor ordinarily resides or, with the leave of the Court, on the outer door or on some other 
conspicuous part of the house in which he carries on business or personally works for gain or in which he 
is known to have last resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain; and the produce shall 
thereupon be deemed to have passed into the possession of the Court.  
45. Provisions as to agricultural produce under attachment. —(1) Where agricultural produce is 
attached, the Court shall make such arrangements for the custody thereof as it may deem sufficient and, 
for the purpose of enabling the Court to make such arrang ements, every application for the attachment of 
a growing crop shall specify the time at which it is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Court in this behalf either in the order of 
attachment or i n any subsequent order, the judgment -debtor may tend, cut, gather and store the produce and do 
any other act necessary for maturing or preserving it; and if the judgment -debtor fails to do, all or any of such 
acts, the decree -holder may, with the permissio n of the Court and subject to the like conditions, do all or any of 
them either by himself or by any person appointed by him in this behalf and the costs incurred by the                
decree -holder shall be recoverable from the judgment -debtor as if they were included in, or formed part of, the 
decree.  
(3) Agricultural produce attached as a growing crop shall not be deemed to have ceased to be under 
attachment or to require re -attachment merely because it has been served from the soil.  
(4) Where an order f or the attachment of a growing crop has been made at a considerable time before 
the crop is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered, the Court may suspend the execution of the order for such 
time as it thinks fit, and may, in its discretion, make a further order prohibiting the removal of the crop 
pending the execution of the order of attachment.  
(5) A growing crop which from its nature does not admit of being stored shall not be attached under 
this rule at any time less than twenty days before the time at w hich it is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.  
46. Attachment of debt, share and other property not in possession of judgment -debtor .—(1) In 
the case of —  
(a) a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument,  162 
 (b) a share in the capital of a corporation,  
(c) other movable property not in the possession of the judgment -debtor, except property 
deposited in, or in the custody of, any Court,  
the attachment shall be made by a written order prohibiting, —  
(i) in the case of the debt, the credit or from recovering  the debt and the debtor from making 
payment thereof until the further order of the Court;  
(ii) in the case of the share, the person in whose name the share may be standing from transferring 
the same or receiving any dividend thereon;  
(iii) in the case of the other movable property except as aforesaid, the person in possession of the 
same from giving it over to the judgement -debtor.  
(2) A copy of such order shall be affixed on some conspicuous part of the court -house, and another 
copy shall be sent in the c ase of the debt, to the debtor , in the case of the share, to the proper officer of the 
corporation, and, in the case of the other movable property (except as aforesaid), to the person in 
possession of the same.  
(3) A debtor prohibited under clause (i) of sub-rule ( 1) may pay the amount of his debt into Court, 
and such payment shall discharge him as effectually as payment to the party entitled to receive the same.  
1[46A.   Notice to garnishee. —(1) The Court may in the case of a debt (other than a debt secured  by a 
mortgage or a charge) which has been attached under rule 46 upon the application of the attaching 
creditor, issue notice to the garnishee liable to pay such debt, calling upon him either to pay into Court the 
debt due from him to the judgment -debtor or so much thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the decree 
and costs of execution, or to appear and show cause why he should not do so.  
(2) An application under sub -rule ( 1) shall be made on affidavit verifying the facts alleged and stating 
that in the belief of the deponent, the garnishee is indebted to the judgment -debtor.  
(3) Where the garnishee pays in the Court the amount due from him to the judgment -debtor or so 
much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy the decree and the costs of the execution, the  Court may direct that 
the amount may be paid to the decree -holder towards satisfaction of the decree and costs of the execution.  
46B. Order against garnishee. —Where the garnishee does not forthwith pay into Court the amount 
due from him to the judgment -debtor or so much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy the decree and the costs 
of execution, and does not appear and show cause in answer to the notice, the Court may order the 
garnishee to comply with the terms of such notice, and on such order, execution m ay issue as though such 
order were a decree against him.  
46C. Trial of disputed questions. —Where  the garnishee disputes liability, the Court may order that 
any issue of question necessary for the determination of liability shall be tried as if it where an issue in a 
suit, and upon the determination of such issue shall make such order or orders as it deems fit:  
Provided that if the debt in respect of which the application under rule 46A is made is in respect of a 
sum of money beyond the pecuniary jurisdictio n of the Court, the Court shall send the execution case to 
the Court of the District Judge to which the said Court is subordinate, and thereupon the Court of the 
District Judge or any other competent Court to which it may be transferred by the District Jud ge shall deal 
with it in the same manner as if the case had been originally instituted in that Court.  
46D.  Procedure where debt belongs to third person. —Where it is suggested or appears to be 
probable that the debt belongs to some third person, or that any  third person has a lien or charge on, or 
other interest in such debt, the Court may order such third person to appear and state the nature and 
particulars of his claim, if any, to such debt and prove the same.  
46E. Order as regards third person. —After hea ring such third person and any person or persons who 
may subsequently be ordered to appear, or where such third or other person or persons do not appear when so 
ordered, the Court may make such order as is hereinbefore provided, or such other order or orde rs upon such  
                                                      
1. Ss. 46A to 46 -I ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w. e.f 1-2-1977).  163 
 terms, if any, with respect to the lien, charge or interest, as the case may be, of such third or other person 
or persons as it may deem fit and proper.  
46F. Payment by garnishee to be valid discharge. —Payment  made by the garnishee on notice 
under rule 46A or under any such order as aforesaid shall be a valid discharge to him as against the 
judgement -debtor and any other person ordered to appear as aforesaid for the amount paid or levied, 
although the decree in execution of which the applicatio n under rule 46A was made, or the order passed 
in the proceedings on such application may be set aside or reversed.  
46G. Costs. —The costs of any application made under rule 46A and of any proceeding arising there  
from or incidental thereto shall be in the discretion of the Court.  
46H. Appeals. —An order made under rule 46B, rule 46C or rule 46E shall be applicable as a decree.  
46-I.—Application to negotiable instruments. —The provisions of rule s 46A to 46H (both 
inclusive) shall, so far as may be, apply in re lation to negotiable instruments attached under rule 51 as 
they apply in relation to debts.]  
47. Attachment of share in movables. —Where  the property to be attached consists of the share or 
interest of the judgment -debtor in movable property belonging to hi m and another as co -owners, the 
attachment shall be made by a notice to the judgment -debtor prohibiting him from transferring the share 
or interest or charging it in any way.  
48. Attachment of salary or allowances of servant of the Government or railway co mpany or 
local authority .—(1) Where the property to be attached is the salary or allowances of a 1[servant of the 
Government] or of a servant of a railway company or local authority 2[or of a servant of a corporation 
engaged in any trade or industry which is established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, or a 
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)] the Court, 
whether the judgment -debtor or the disbursing officer is or is not within the local limits of the Cou rt’s 
jurisdiction, may order that the amount shall, subject to the provisions of section 60, be withheld from 
such salary or allowances either in one payment or by monthly instalments as the Court may direct; and 
upon notice of the order to such officer as  3[the appropriate Government may by notification in the 
Official Gazette] appoint 4[in this behalf, — 
(a) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed within the local limits to which this Code for 
the time being extends, the officer or other person  whose duty it is to disburse the same shall withhold 
and remit to the Court the amount due under the order, or the monthly instalments, as the case may be;  
(b) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed beyond the said limits, the officer or othe r 
person within those limits whose duty it is to instruct the disbursing authority regarding the amount of the 
salary or allowances to be disbursed shall remit to the Court the amount due under the order, or the 
monthly instalments, as the case may be, and  shall direct the disbursing authority to reduce the aggregate 
of the amounts from time to time, to be disbursed by the aggregate of the amounts from time to time 
remitted to the Court. ] 
(2) Where the attachable proportion of such salary or allowances is a lready being withheld and 
remitted to a Court in pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied order of attachment, the officer appointed 
by 5[the appropriate Government] in this behalf shall forthwith return the subsequent order to the Court 
issuing it with a f ull statement of all the particulars of the existing attachment.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 3, for “public officer”.  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1942, s. 3 and the second Sch., for “the Centr al Government or the Provincial Government may b y 
notification in the Official Gazette”.  
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1939, s. 2, for certain words.  
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 1942, s. 3, and the Schedule , for “the Central Government or the Provincial Government, as t he may be”.  164 
 1[(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is returned in accordance with the provisions of            
sub-rule ( 2) shall, without further notice or other process, bind the appropriate  Government or the railway 
company or local authority or corporation of Government company, as the case may be, while the judgement -
debtor is within the local limits to which this Code for the time being extends and while he is beyond those 
limits, if he i s in receipt of any salary or allowances payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the 
Consolidated Fund of the State or the funds of a railway company or local authority or corporation or 
Government company in India; and the appropriate Government or the railway company or local authority or 
corporation or Government company, as the case may be, shall be liable for any sum paid in contravention of 
this rule.]  
2[Explanation. —In this rule, “appropriate Government” means, — 
(i) As respects any person in  the service of the Central Government, or any servant of a railway 
administration or of a cantonment authority or of the port authority of a major port, or any servant of a 
corporation engaged in any trade or industry which is established by a Central Act , or any servant of a 
Government company in which any part of the share capital is held by the Central Government or by 
more than one State Governments or partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more State 
Governments, the Central Government;  
(ii) As respects any other servant of the Government, or a servant of any other local or other 
authority, or any servant of a corporation engaged in  any trade or industry which is established by a 
Provincial or State act, or a servant of any other Governm ent company, the State Government.]  
 
3[48A. Attachment of salary or allowances of private employees. —(1)Where the property to be 
attached is the salary or allowances of an employee other than an employee to whom rule 48 applies, the 
Court, where the disbur sing officer of the employee is within the local limits of the Court ’s jurisdiction, 
may order than the amount shall, subject to the provision of section 60, be withheld from such salary or 
allowances either in one payment or by monthly instalments as the Court may direct; and upon notice of 
the order to such disbursing officer, such disbursing officer shall remit to the court the amount due under 
the order, or the monthly instalments, as the case may be.  
(2) Where the attachable portion of such salary or a llowances is already being withheld or remitted to 
the Court in pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied order of attachment, the disbursing officer shall 
forthwith return the subsequent order to the Court issuing it with a full statement of all the particu lars of 
the existing attachment.  
(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is returned in accordance with the provisions of             
sub-rule ( 2), shall, without further notice or other process, hind the employer while the judgment -
debtors, is wit hin the local limits to which this Code for the time being extends and while he is beyond 
those -limits, if he is in receipt of salary or allowances payable out of the funds of an employer in any part 
of India, and the employer shall be liable for any sum p aid in contravention of this rule.]  
49. Attachment of partnership property. —(1) Save as otherwise provided by this rule, property 
belonging to a partnership shall not be attached or sold in execution of a decree other than a decree 
passed against the firm or against the partners in the firm as such.  
(2) The Court may, on the application of the holder of a decree against a partner, make an order 
charging the interest of such partner in the partnership property, and profits with payment of the amount due 
unde r the decree, and may, by the same or a subsequent order, appoint a receiver of the share of such partner 
in the profits (whether already declared or accruing) and of any other money which may be coming to him in 
respect of the partnership , and direct acco unts and inquiries and make an order for the sale of such interest or 
other orders as might have been directed or made if a charge had been made in favour of the decree holder 
by such partner, or as the circumstances of the case may require.  
(3) The other partner or partners shall be at liberty at any time to redeem the interest charged or, in 
the case of a sale being directed, to purchase the same.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for sub -rule ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  165 
 (4) Every application for an order under sub -rule ( 2) shall be served on the judgment -debtor and on 
his partn ers or such of them as are within 1[India].  
(5) Every application made by any partner of the judgment -debtor under sub -rule ( 3) shall be served 
on the decree -holder and on the judgment -debtor, and on such of the other partners as do not join in the 
applica tion and as are within1[India].  
(6) Service under sub -rule ( 4) or sub -rule ( 5) shall be deemed to be service on all the partners and all 
orders made on such applications shall be similarly served.  
50. Execution of decree against firm. —(1) Where a decree ha s been passed against a firm, 
execution may be granted —  
(a) against  any property of the partnership;  
(b) against any person who has appeared in his own name under rule 6 or rule 7 of Order XXX or 
who has admitted on the pleadings that he is, or who has be en adjudged to be, a partner;  
(c) against any person who has been individually served as a partner with a summons and has 
failed to appear:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the provisions of 
2[section 30 o f the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932)].  
(2) Where the decree -holder claims to be entitled to cause the decree to be executed against any 
person other than such a person as is referred to in sub -rule ( 1), clauses ( b) and ( c), as being a partner in 
the firm, he may, apply to the Court which passed the decree for leave, and where the liability is not 
disputed, such court may grant such leave, or, where such liability is disputed, may order that the liability 
of such person be tried and determined in a ny manner in which any issue in a suit may be tried and 
determined.  
(3) Where the liability of any person has been tried and determined under sub -rule ( 2), the order made 
thereon shall have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it 
were a decree.  
(4) Save as against any property of the partnership, a decree against a firm shall not lease, render liable 
or otherwise affect any partner therein unless he has been served with a summons to appear and answer.  
3[(5) Nothing in this rule shall apply to a decree passed against a Hindu Undivided Family by virtue 
of the provisions of rule 10 of Order XXX.] 
51. Attachment of negotiable instruments. —Where the property is a negotiable instrument not 
deposited in a Court, not i n the custody of a public officer, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure, 
and the instrument shall be brought into Court and held subject to further orders of the Court.  
52. Attachment of property in custody of Court or public officer. —Where the p roperty to be 
attached is in the custody of any Court or public officer, the attachment shall be made by a notice to such 
Court or officer, requesting that such property, and any interest or dividend becoming payable thereon, 
may be held subject to the fur ther orders of the Court from which the notice is issued:  
Provided that, where such property is in the custody of a Court, any question of title or priority 
arising between the decree -holder and any other person, not being the judgment -debtor, claiming to be 
interested in such property by virtue of any assignment, attachment or otherwise, shall be determined by 
such Court.  
53. Attachment of decrees. —(1) Where the property to be attached is a decree, either for the 
payment of money or for sale in enforcement  of a mortgage or charge, the attachment shall be made, —  
(a) if the decrees were passed by the same Court, then by Order of such Court, and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”.  
2. Subs. by Act 1 04 of 1976, s. 72, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  166 
 (b) if the decree sought to be attached was passed by another Court, then by the issue to such 
other Court of a not ice by the Court which passed the decree sought to be executed, requesting such 
other Court to stay the execution of its decree unless and until —  
(i) the court which passed the decree sought to be executed cancels the notice, or 
1[(ii) (a) the holder of t he decree sought to be executed,  or 
(b) his judgment -debtor with the previous consent in writing of such decree -holder, or with the 
permission of the attaching Court,  
applies to the Court receiving such notice to execute the attached decree.]  
(2) Where a C ourt makes an order under clause ( a) of sub -rule ( 1), or receives an application under 
sub-head ( ii) of clause ( b) of the said sub -rule, it shall, on the application of the creditor who has attached 
the decree or his judgment -debtor, proceeds to execute t he attached decree and apply the net proceeds in 
satisfaction of the decree sought to be executed.  
(3) The holder of a decree sought to be executed by the attachment of another of decree the nature 
specified in sub -rule ( 1) shall be deemed to be the repres entative of the holder of the attached decree and 
to be entitled to execute such attached decree in any manner lawful for the holder thereof.  
(4) Where the property to be attached in the execution of a decree is a decree other than a decree of 
the nature r eferred to in sub -rule ( 1), the attachment shall be made, by a notice by the Court which passed 
the decree sought to be executed, to the holder of the decree sought to be attached, prohibiting him from 
transferring or charging the same in any way , and, whe re such decree has been passed by any other Court, 
also by sending to such other Court a notice to abstain from executing the decree sought to be attached 
until such notice is cancelled by the Court from which it was sent.  
(5) The holder of a decree attach ed under this rule shall give the Court executing the decree such 
information and aid as may reasonably be required.  
(6) On the application of the holder of a decree sought to be executed by the attachment of another 
decree, the Court making an order of at tachment under this rule shall give notice of such order to the 
judgment -debtor bound by the decree attached; and no payment or adjustment of the attached decree 
made by the judgment -debtor in contravention of such order 2[with knowledge thereof or] after receipt of 
notice thereof, either through the Court or otherwise, shall be recognized by any Court so long as the 
attachment remains in force.  
54. Attachment of immovable property .—(1) Where the property is immovable, the attachment 
shall be made by an ord er prohibiting the judgment -debtor from transferring or charging the property in 
any way, and all persons from taking any benefit from such transfer of charge.  
2[(1A) The order shall also require the judgment -debtor to attend Court on a specified date to t ake 
notice of the date to be fixed for settling the terms of the proclamation of sale.]  
(2) The order shall be proclaimed at some place on or adjacent to such property by beat of drum or other 
customary mode, and a copy of the order shall be affixed on a c onspicuous part of the property and then 
upon, a conspicuous part of the Court -house, and also, where the property is land paying revenue to the 
Government, in the office of the Collector of the district in which the land is situate 2[and, where the proper ty 
is land situate in a village, also in the office of the Gram Panchayat, if any, having jurisdiction over that 
village.]  
55. Removal of attachment after satisfaction of decree. —Where — 
(a) the amount decreed with costs and all charges and expenses resulti ng from the attachment of any 
property are paid into Court, or  
(b) satisfaction of the decree is otherwise made through the Court or certified to the Court, or  
(c) the decree is set aside or reversed,  
the attachment shall be deemed to be withdrawn, and, in  the case of immovable property, the withdrawal 
shall, if the judgment -debtor so desires, be proclaimed at his expense, and a copy of the proclamation 
shall be affixed in the manner prescribed by the last preceding r ule. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1972, s. 72, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  167 
 56. Order for payment of coin or cu rrency notes to party entitled under decree. —Where  the 
property attached is current coin or currency notes, the Court may, at any time during the continuance of 
the attachment, direct that such coin or notes, or a part thereof sufficient to satisfy the dec ree, be paid over 
to the party entitled under the decree to receive the same.  
1[57. Determination of attachment. —(1) Where any property has been attached in execution of a 
decree and the Court, for any reason, passes an order dismissing the application for  the execution of the 
decree, the Court shall direct whether the attachment shall continue or cease and shall also indicate the 
period up  to which such attachment shall continue or the date on which such attachment shall cease.  
(2) If the Court omits to gi ve such direction, the attachment shall be deemed to have ceased.]  
2[Adjudication of claims and objections 
58. Adjudication of claims to or objections to attachment of, property. —(1) Where any claim is 
preferred to, or any objection is made to the attachme nt of, any property attached in execution of a decree 
on the ground that such property is not liable to such attachment, the Court shall proceed to adjudicate 
upon the claim or objection in accordance with the provisions herein contained:  
Provided that no such, claim or objection shall be entertained —  
(a) where, before the claim is preferred or objection is made, the property attached has already 
been sold; or  
(b) where the Court considers that the claim or objection was designedly or unnecessarily delayed . 
(2) All questions (including questions relating to right, title or interest in the property attached) arising 
between the parties to a proceeding or their representatives under this rule and relevant to the adjudication of 
the claim or objection, shall b e determined by the Court dealing with the claim or objection and not by a 
separate suit.  
(3) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in sub -rule (2), the Court shall, in accordance 
with such determination, —  
(a) allow the claim or objection an d release the property from attachment either wholly or to such 
extent as it thinks fit; or  
(b) disallow the claim or objection; or  
(c) continue the attachment subject to any mortgage, charge or other interest in favour of any 
person; or  
(d) pass such orde r as in the circumstances of the case it deems fit.  
(4) Where any claim or objection has been adjudicated upon under this rule, order made thereon shall 
have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it were a dec ree. 
(5) Where a claim or an objection is preferred and the Court, under the proviso to sub -rule (I), refuses 
to entertain it, the party against whom such order is made may institute a suit to establish the right which 
he claims to the property in dispute;  but, subject to the result of such-suit, if any, an order so refusing to 
entertain the claim or objection shall be conclusive.  
59. Stay of sale. —Where before the claim was preferred or the objection was made, the property 
attached had already been adverti sed for sale, the Court may —  
(a) if the property is movable, make an order postponing the sale pending the adjudication of the 
claim or objection, or  
(b) if the property is immovable, make an order that, pending the adjudication of the claim or 
objection,  the property shall not be sold, or that pending such adjudication, the property may be sold 
but the sale shall not be confirmed,  
and any such order may be made subject to such terms and conditions as to security or otherwise as the 
Court thinks fit. ] 
60. [Release of property from attachment .] Omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure  (Amendment )             
Act, 1976  (104 of 1976 ), s. 72 ( w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  
61. [Disallowance of claim  to property attached .] omitted by s.  72, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).    
62. [Cont inuance of attachment subject to claim of incumbrancer .] omitted by s.  72, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-
1977 ). 
63. [Saving of suits to establish right to attached property .] omitted by s.  72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977 ).] 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for  rule 57 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for the sub heading “Investigation of claims and objections ” and for rules 58 to 63  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  168 
 64. Power to order property attached to be sold  and proceeds to be paid to person entitled. —Any 
Court executing a decree may order that any property attached by it and liable to sale, or such portion 
thereof as may see necessary to satisfy the decree, shall be sold, and that the proceeds of such sale, or a 
sufficient portion thereof, shall be paid to the party entitled under the decree to receive the same.  
65. Sales by whom conducted and how made. —save as otherwise prescribed, every sale in 
execution of a decree shall be conducted by an officer of the C ourt or by such other person as the Court 
may appoint in this behalf, and shall be made by public auction in manner prescribed.  
66. Proclamation of sales by public auction. —(1) Where any property is ordered to be sold by 
public auction in execution of a de cree, the Court shall cause a proclamation of the intended sale to be 
made in the language of such Court.  
(2) Such proclamation shall be drawn up after notice to the decree -holder and the judgment -debtor 
and shall state the time and place of sale, and spec ify as fairly and accurately as possible —  
(a) the property to be sold 1[or, where a part of the property would be sufficient to satisfy the 
decree, such part];  
(b) the revenue assessed upon the estate or past of the estate, where the property to be sold i s an 
interest in an estate or in part of an estate paying revenue to the Government;  
(c) any incumbrance to which the property is liable;  
(d) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is ordered; and  
(e) every other thing which the Court considers mate rial for a purchaser to know in order to judge 
of the nature and value of the property:  
1[Provided that where notice of the date for settling the terms of the proclamation has been given to 
the judgment -debtor by means of an order under rule 54, it shall n ot be necessary to give notice under this 
rule to the judgment -debtor unless the Court otherwise directs:  
Provided further that nothing in this rule shall be construed as requiring the Court to enter in the 
proclamation of sale its own estimate of the valu e of the property, but the proclamation shall include the 
estimate, if any, given, by either or both of the Parties.  
 (3) Every application for an order for sale under this rule shall be accompanied by a statement signed 
and verified in the manner hereinbe fore prescribed for the signing and verification of pleadings and 
containing, so far as they are known to or can be ascertained by the person making the varification, the 
matters required by sub -rule (2) to be specified in the proclamation.  
(4) For the pur pose of ascertaining the matters to be specified in the proclamation, the Court may 
summon any person whom it thinks necessary to summon and may examine him in respect to any such 
matters and require him to produce any document in his possession or power r elating thereto.  
67. Mode of making proclamation. —(1) Every proclamation shall be made and published, as nearly 
as may be , in the manner prescribed by rule 54, sub -rule (2). 
(2) Where the Court so directs, such proclamation shall also be published in the O fficial Gazette or in 
a local newspaper, or in both, and the  costs of such publication shall be deemed to be costs of the sale.  
(3) Where property is divided  into lots for the purpose of being sold separately, it shall not be necessary 
to make a separate p roclamation for each lot, unless proper notice of the sale cannot, in the opinion of the 
Court, otherwise be given.  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  169 
 68. Time of sale. —Save  in the case of property of the kind described in the proviso to rule 43, no sale 
hereunder shall, without the conse nt in writing of the judgment -debtor, take place until after the 
expiration of at least 1[fifteen days] in the case of immovable property, and of at least 2[seven days] in the 
case of movable property, calculated from the date on which the copy of the proc lamation has been 
affixed on the court -house of the Judge ordering the sale.  
69. Adjournment or stoppage of sale. —(1) The Court may, in its discretion, adjourn any sale 
hereunder to a specified day and hour, and the officer conducting any such sale may in his discretion 
adjourn the sale, recording his reasons for such adjournment :  
Provided that, where the sale is made in, or within the precincts of, the court -house, no such 
adjournment shall be made without the leave of the Court.  
(2) Where a sale is adjou rned under sub -rule ( 1) for a longer period than 3[thirty] days afresh 
proclamation under rule 67 shall be made, unless the judgment -debtor consents to waive it.  
(3) Every sale shall be stopped if, before the lot is knocked down, the debt and costs (includ ing the 
costs of the sale) are tendered to the officer conducting the sale, or proof is given to his satisfaction that 
the amount of such debt and costs has been paid into the Court which ordered the sale.  
70. [Saving of certain sales. ] Omitted  by the Code  of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1956 (66 of 
1956 ), s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
71. Defaulting purchaser answerable for loss on re -sale.—Any deficiency of price which may 
happen on a re -sale by reason of the purchaser's default, and all expenses attending  such re -sale, shall be 
certified to the Court 4*** by the officer or other person holding the sale, and shall, at the instance of 
either the decree -holder or the judgment -debtor, be recoverable from the defaulting purchaser under the 
provisions relating t o the execution of a decree for the payment of money.  
72. Decree holder not to bid for or buy property without permission. —(1) No holder of a decree 
in execution of which property is sold shall, without the express permission of the Court, bid for or 
purch ase the property.  
(2) Where decree -holder purchases, amount of decree may be taken as payment. —Where  a 
decree -holder purchases with such permission, the purchase -money and the amount due on the decree 
may, subject to the provisions of section 73, be set of f against one another, and the Court executing the 
decree shall enter up satisfaction of the decree in whole or in part accordingly.  
 (3) Where a decree -holder purchases, by himself or through another person, without such permission, 
the Court may, if it t hinks fit, on the application of the judgment -debtor or any other person whose interests 
are affected by the sale, by order set aside the sale; and the costs of such application and order, and any 
deficiency of price which may happen on the re -sale and all  expenses attending it, shall be paid by the decree -
holder.  
5[72A. Mortgagee not to bid at sale without the leave of the Court. —(/) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in rule 72, a mortgagee of immovable property shall not bid for or purchase property sold  in 
execution of a decree on the mortgage unless the Court grants him leave to bid for or purchase the property.  
(2) If leave to bid is granted to such mortgagee, then the Court shall fix a reserve price as regards the 
mortgagee, and unless the Court other wise directs, the reserve price shall be —  
(a) not less than the amount then due for principal, interest and costs in respect of the mortgage if 
the property is sold in one lot; and  
(b) in the case of any property sold in lots, not less than such sum as sh all appear to the Court to 
be properly attributable to each lot in relation to the amount then due for principal, interest and costs 
on the mortgage.  
  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for “thir ty days” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2.  Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “fifteen days” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “ seven days” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. The words “or to the Collector or subordinate of the Collector, as the case may,” omitted by Act  66 of 1956, s. 14  (w.e.f. 1 -1-
1957) .  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  170 
 (3) In other respects, the provisions of sub -rules (2) and (3) of rule 72 shall apply in relation to 
purchase by the decree -holder under that rule.]  
73. Restriction on bidding or purchase by officers. —No officer or other person having any duty to 
perform in connection with any sale shall, either directly or indirectly, bid for, acquire or attempt to 
acquire any interest in the property sold.  
Sale of movable property  
74. Sale of agricultural produce. —(1) Where the property  to be sold is agricultural produce, the sale 
shall be held, —  
(a) if such produce is a growing crop, on or near the land on  which such crop  has grown, or  
(b) if such produce has been cut or gathered, at or near -the th reshing  floor or place for trading out 
grain or the like or fodder -stack on or in w hich it is deposited :  
Provided that the Court may direct the sale to be held at the nearest pl ace of pub lic resort, if it is of 
opinion that the Produce is thereby likely to sell to greater advantage.  
(2) Where, on the produce being put up for sale, —  
(a) a fair price, in the estimation of the person holding the sale, is not offered for it, and  
(b) the owner of the produce or a person authorized to act in his behalf applies to have the sale 
postponed till next day or, if a market is held at the place of sale, the next market -day, 
the sale shall be postponed accordingly and shall be then completed, w hatever price may be offered for 
the produce.  
75. Special provisions relating to growing crops. —(1) Where the property to be sold is a growing crop 
and the crop from its nature admits of being stored but has not yet been stored, the  day of the sale shall b e so 
fixed as to admit of its being made ready for storing before the arrival of such day, and the sale shall not be 
held until the crop has been cut or gathered and is ready for storing.  
(2) Where the crop from its nature does not admit of being stored, i t may be sold before it is cut and 
gathered, and the purchaser shall be entitled to enter on the land, and to do all that is necessary for the 
purpose of tending and cutting or gathering it.  
76. Negotiable instruments and shares in corporations. —Where the property to be sold is a 
negotiable  instrument or a share in a corporation, the Court may, instead of directing the sale to be made 
by public auction, authorized the sale of such instrument or share through a broker.  
77. Sale by public auction. —(1) Where m ovable property is sold by public auction the price of each 
lot shall be paid at the time of sale or as soon after as the officer or other person holding the sale directs, 
and in default of payment the property shall forthwith be re -sold.  
(2) On payment of  the purchase -money, the officer or other person holding the sale shall grant a 
receipt for the same, and the sale shall become absolute.  
(3) Where the movable property to be sold is a share in goods belonging to the judgment -debtor and a 
co-owner, and two  or more persons, of whom one is such co -owner, respectively bid the same sum for 
such property or for any lot, the bidding shall be deemed to be the bidding of the co -owner.  
78. Irregularity not to vitiate sale, but any person injured may sue. —No irregula rity in publishing 
or conducting  the sale of movable property shall vitiate the sale; but any person sustaining any injury by 
reason of such irregularity at the hand of any other person may institute a suit against him for compensation 
or (if such other pe rson is the purchaser) for the recovery of the specific property and for compensation in 
default of such recovery).  
79. Delivery of movable prope rty, debts and shares. —(1) Where the property sold is movable 
property of which actual seizure has been made, i t shall be delivered to the purchaser.   171 
  (2) Where the property sold is movable property in the possession of some person other than the 
judgment -debtor, the delivery thereof to the purchaser shall be made by giving notice to the person in 
possession prohi biting him from delivering possession of the property to any person except the purchaser.  
(3) Where the property sold is a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument, or is a share in a 
corporation, the delivery thereof shall be made by a written order of  the Court prohibiting the creditor 
from receiving the debt or any interest thereon, and the debtor from making payment thereof to any 
person except the purchaser, or prohibiting the person in whose name the share, may be standing from 
making any transfer of the share to any person except the purchaser, or receiving payment of any 
dividend or interest thereon, and the manager, secretary or other proper officer of the corporation from 
permitting any such transfer or making any such payment to any person exce pt the purchaser.  
80. Transfer of negotiable instruments and shares. —(1) Where the execution of a document or the 
endorsement of the party in whose name a negotiable instrument or a share in a corporation is standing is 
required to transfer such negotiable  instrument or, share the Judge or such officer as he may appoint in 
this behalf may execute such document or make such endorsement as may be necessary, and such 
execution or endorsement shall have the same effect as an execution or endorsement by the part y. 
(2) Such execution or endorsement may be in the following form, namely : — 
A. B. by C.D. Judge of the Court of (or as the case may  be) , in a suit by E. F. against  A.B. 
(3) Until the transfer of such negotiable instrument or share, the Court may, by orde r, appoint some 
person to receive any interest or dividend due thereon and to sign a receipt for the same; and any receipt 
so signed shall be as valid and effectual for all purposes as if the same had been signed by the party 
himself.  
81. Vesting order in case of other property. —In the case of any movable property not hereinbefore 
provided for, the Court may make an order vesting such property in the purchaser or as he may direct; and 
such property shall vest accordingly.  
Sale of immovable property  
82. What  Court may order sales. —Sales  of immovable property in execution of decrees may be 
ordered by any Court other than a Court of Small Causes.  
83. Postponement of sale to enable judgment -debtor to raise amount of decree. —(1) Where an 
order for the sale of imm ovable property has been made, if the judgment -debtor can satisfy the Court that 
there is reason to believe that the amount of the decree may be raised by the mortgage or lease or private 
sale of such property, or some part thereof, or of any other immovab le property of the judgment -debtor, 
the Court may, on his application, postpone the sale of the property comprised in the order for sale on 
such terms and for such period as it thinks proper, to enable him to raise the amount.  
(2) In such case the Court sh all grant a certificate to the judgment -debtor authorizing him within a 
period to be mentioned therein, and notwithstanding anything contained in section 64, to make the 
proposed mortgage, lease or sale:  
Provided that all moneys payable under such mortgage , lease or sale shall be paid, not to the 
judgment -debtor, but, save in so far as a decree -holder  is entitled to set -off such money under the 
provisions of rule 72, into Court:  
Provided also that not mortgage, lease or sale under this rule shall become abs olute until it has been 
confirmed by the Court.  
(3) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to apply to a sale of property directed to be sole in execution 
of a decree for sale in enforcement of a mortgage of, or charge on, such property.  
84. Deposit by purch aser and re -sale on default. —(1) On every sale of immovable property the 
person declared to be the purchaser shall pay immediately after such declaration a deposit of twenty -five 
per cent. on the amount of his purchase -money to the officer or other person conducting the sale, and in 
default of such deposit, the property shall forthwith be re -sold.  
(2) Where the decree -holder is the purchaser and is entitled to set -off the purchase -money under rule 
72, the Court may dispense with the requirements of this rul e.  172 
 85. Time for payment in full of purchase money. —The full amount of purchase -money payable 
shall be paid by the purchaser into Court before the Court closes on the fifteenth day from the sale of the 
property:  
Provided that, in calculating the amount to be so paid into Court, the purchaser shall have the 
advantage of any set -off to which he may be entitled  under rule 72.  
86. Procedure in default of payment. —In default of payment within the period mentioned in the 
last preceding rule, the deposit may, if t he Court thinks fit, after defraying the expenses of the sale, be 
forfeited to the Government, and the property shall be re -sold, and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit 
all claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may subsequently b e sold.  
87. Notification on re -sale.—Every  re-sale of immovable property, in default of payment of the 
purchase -money within the period allowed for such payment, shall be made after the issue of fresh 
proclamation in the manner and for the period hereinbef ore prescribed for the sale.  
88. Bid of co -sharer to have preference. —Where  the property sold is a share of undivided 
immovable property and two or more persons, of whom one is a co -sharer, respectively bid the same sum 
for such property or for any lot, th e bid shall be deemed to be the bid of the co -sharer.  
89. Application to set aside sale on deposit. —(1) Where immovable property has been sold in 
execution of a decree, 1[any person claiming an interest in the property sold at the time of the sale or at 
the time of making the application, or acting for or in the interest of such person,] may apply to have the 
sale set aside on his depositing in Court, — 
(a) for payment to the purchaser, a sum equal to five per cent. of the purchase -money, and  
(b) for payment , to the decree -holder, the amount specified in the proclamation of sale as that for 
the recovery of which the sale was ordered, less any amount which may, since the date of such 
proclamation of sale, have been received by the decree -holder.  
(2) Where a pe rson applies under rule 90 to set aside the sale of his immovable property, he shall not, 
unless he withdraws his application, be entitled to make or prosecute an application under this rule.  
(3) Nothing in this rule shall relieve the judgment -debtor from any liability he may be under in 
respect of costs and interest not covered by the proclamation of sale.  
2[90. Application to set aside sale on ground of irregularity or fraud. —(1) Where any immovable 
property has been sold in execution of a decree, the dec ree-holder, or the purchaser, or any other person 
entitled to share in a rateable distribution of assets, or whose interests are affected by the sale, may apply to 
the Court to set aside the sale on the ground of a material irregularity or fraud in publish ing or conducting it.  
(2) No sale shall be set aside on the ground of irregularity or fraud in publishing or conducting it 
unless, upon the facts proved, the Court is satisfied that the applicant has sustained substantial injury by 
reason of such irregular ity or fraud.  
(3) No application to set aside a sale under this rule shall be entertained upon any ground which the 
applicant could have taken on or before the date on which the proclamation of sale was drawn up.  
Explanation .—The mere absence of, or defect  in, attachment of the property sold shall not, by itself, 
be a ground for setting aside a sale under this rule.]  
91. Application by purchaser to set aside sale on ground of judgment -debtor having no saleable 
interest. —The purchaser at any such sale in exe cution of a decree may apply to the Court to set aside the 
sale, on the ground that the judgment -debtor had no saleable interest in the property sold.  
92. Sale when to become absolute or be set aside. —(1) Where no application is made under rule 89, 
rule 90  or rule 91, or where such application is made and disallowed, the Court shall make an order 
confirming the sale, and thereupon the sale shall become absolute:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for rule 90 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  173 
 1[Provided that, where any property is sold in execution of a decree pending the final disposal of any 
claim to, or any objection to the attachment of, such property, the Court shall not confirm such sale until 
the final disposal of such claim or objection.]  
(2) Where such application is made and allowed, and where, in the case of an application -unde r rule 
89, the deposit required by that rule is made within 2[sixty days] from the date of sale, 3[or in cases where 
the amount deposited under rule 89 is found to be deficient owing to any clerical or arithmetical mistake 
on the part of the depositor and such deficiency has been made good within such time as may be fixed by 
the Court, the Court shall make an order setting aside the sale]:  
Provided that no order shall be made unless notice of the application has been given to all persons 
affected thereby : 
4[Provided further that the deposit under this sub -rule may be made within sixty days in all such cases 
where the period of thirty days, within which the deposit had to be made, has not expired before the 
commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendme nt) Act, 2002.  
(3) No suit to set aside an order made under this rule shall be brought by any person against whom 
such order is made.  
5[(4) Where a third party challenges the judgment -debtor’s title by filing a suit against the auction -
purchaser, the decre e-holder and the judgment -debtor shall be necessary parties to the suit.  
(5) If the suit referred to in sub -rule ( 4) is decreed, the Court shall direct the decree -holder to refund 
the money to the auction -purchaser, and where such an order is passed the ex ecution proceeding in which 
the sale had been held shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, be revived at the stage at which the sale 
was ordered].  
93. Return of purchase r-money in certain cases. —Where  a sale of immovable property is set aside 
under rule  92, the purchaser shall be entitled to an order for repayment of his purchase -money, with or 
without interest as the Court may direct, against any person to whom it has been paid.  
94. Certificate to purchaser. —Where  a sale of immovable property has become  absolute, the Court 
shall grant a certificate specifying the property sold and the name of the person who at the time of sale is 
declared to be the purchaser. Such certificate shall bear date the day on which the sale became absolute.  
95. Delivery of prop erty in occupancy of judgment -debtor —Where  the immovable property sold 
is in the occupancy of the judgment -debtor or of some person on his behalf or of some person claiming 
under a title created by the judgment -debtor subsequently to the attachment of such  property and a 
certificate in respect thereof has been granted under rule 94, the Court shall, on the application of the 
purchaser, order delivery to be made by putting such purchaser or any person whom he may appoint to 
receive delivery on his behalf in possession of the property, and, if need be, by removing any person who 
refuses to vacate the same.  
96. Delivery of property in occupancy of tenant. —Where  the property sold is in the occupancy of a 
tenant or other person entitled to occupy the same and a c ertificate in respect thereof has been granted 
under rule 94, the Court shall, on the application of the purchaser, order delivery to be made by affixing a 
copy of the certificate of sale in some conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to the oc cupant 
by beat of drum or other customary mode, at some convenient place, that the interest of the judgment -
debtor has been transferred to the pu rchaser.  
Resistance of delivery of possession to decree -holder or purchaser  
97. Resistance or obstruction to po ssession of immovable property. —(1) Where the holder of a 
decree for the possession of immovable property or the purchaser of any such property sold in execution 
of a decree is resisted or obstructed by any person in obtaining possession of the property, h e may make 
an application to the Court complaining of such resistance or obstruction.  
6[(2) Where any application is made under sub -rule ( 1), the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the 
application in accordance with the provisions herein contained.] 
                                                      
1. Added by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 14, for “thirty days” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for “the Court shall make an order setting aside the sale” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002) . 
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for sub -rule (2) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  174 
 1[98. Orders after adjudication. —(1) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in rule 
101, the Court shall, in accordance with such determination and subject to the provisions of sub -rule 
(2),—  
(a) make an order allowing the application and direc ting that the applicant be put into the 
possession of the property or dismissing the application; or  
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstances of the case, it may deem fit.  
(2) Where, upon such determination, the Court is satisfied that the resist ance or obstruction was 
occasioned without any just cause by the judgment -debtor or by some other person at his instigation or on 
his behalf, or by any transferee, where such transfer was made during the pendency of the suit or 
execution proceeding, it sha ll direct that the applicant be put into possession of the property, and where 
the applicant is still resisted or obstructed in obtaining possession, the Court may also, at the instance of 
the applicant, order the judgment -debtor, or any person acting at h is instigation or on his behalf, to be 
detained in the civil prison for a term which may extend to thirty days.  
99. Dispossession by decree -holder or purchaser. —(1) Where any person other than the  judgment -
debtor is dispossessed of immovable property by th e holder of a decree for the possession of such 
property or, where such property has been sold in execution of a decree, by the purchaser thereof, he may 
make an application to the Court complaining of such dispossession.  
(2) Where any such application is made, the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the application in 
accordance with the provisions herein contained.  
100. Order to be passed upon application complaining of dispossession. —Upon the determination  of 
the questions referred to in rule 101, the  Court shall, in accordance with such determination, — 
(a) make an order allowing the application and directing that the applicant be put into the 
possession of the property or dismissing the application; or  
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstance s of the case, it may deem fit.  
101. Question to be determined. —All questions (including questions relating to right, title or 
interest in the property) arising between the parties to a proceeding on an application under rule 97 or rule 
99 or their represe ntatives, and relevant to the adjudication of the application, shall be determined by the 
Court dealing with the application and not by a separate suit and for this purpose, the Court shall, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other l aw for the time being in force, be 
deemed to have jurisdiction to decide such questions.  
102. Rules not applicable to transferee lite pendente. —Nothing  in rules 98 and 100 shall apply to 
resistance or obstruction in execution of a decree for the possession  of immovable property by a person to 
whom the judgement -debtor has transferred the property after the institution of the suit in which the 
decree was passed or to the dispossession of any such person.  
Explanation .—In this rule, “transfer” includes a trans fer by operation of law.  
103. Orders to be treated as decrees. —Where  any application has been adjudicated upon under rule 
98 or rule 100, the order made thereon shall have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as 
to an appeal or otherwise as  if it were a decree.]  
2[104. Orders under rule 101 or rule 103 to be subject to the result or pending suit. —Every  order 
made under rule 101 or rule 103 shall subject to the result of any suit that may be pending on the date of 
commencement of the proceedi ng in which such order, is made if in such suit the party against whom the 
order under rule 101 or rule 103 is made has sought to establish a right which he claims to the present 
possession of the property.  
105. Hearing of application. —(1) The Court, befor e which an application under any of the 
foregoing rules of this Order is pending, may fix a day for the hearing of the application.  
(2) Where on the day fixed or on any other day to which the hearing may be adjourned the applicant 
does not appear when the case is called on for hearing, the Court may make an order that the application 
be dismissed.   
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for rules 98 to 103 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  175 
 (3) Where the applicant appears  and the opposite party to whom the notice has been issued by the 
Court does not appear, the Court may hear the application ex par te and pass such order as it thinks fit.  
Explanation .—An application referred to in sub -rule ( 1) includes a claim or objection made under      
rule 58.  
106. Setting aside orders passed ex parte , etc.—(1) The applicant, against whom an order is made 
under s ub-rule ( 2) rule 105 or the opposite party against whom an order is passed ex parte  under sub -rule 
(3) of that rule or under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 23, may apply to the Court to set aside the order, and if he 
satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cau se for his non -appearance whom the application was called 
on for hearing, the Court shall set aside the order or such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and 
shall appoint a day for the further hearing of the application.  
(2) No order shall be  made on an application under sub -rule ( 1) unless notice of the application has 
been served on the other party.  
(3) An application under sub -rule ( 1) shall be made within thirty days from the date of the order, or 
where, in the case of an ex parte  order, t he notice was not duly served, within thirty days from the date 
when applicant had knowledge of the order.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XXI. — In the First Schedule, in Order XXI, rule 104, rule 105 
and rule 106 as inserted by Allahabad  High Court shall be re -numbered as  rule 106-A, 
rule 106-B and rule 106-C respectively.  
 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 10]  
ORDER XXII  
Death, Marriage and Insolvency or Parties  
1. No abatement by party's death if right to sue survives. —The death of  a plaintiff or defendant 
shall not cause the suit to abate if the right to sue survives.  
2. Procedure where one of several plaintiffs or defendants dies and right to sue survives. —
Where there are more plaintiffs or defendants than one, and any of them die s, and where the right to sue 
survives to the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or against the surviving defendant or defendants 
alone, the Court shall cause an entry to the effect to be made on the record,. and the suit shall proceed at 
the instanc e of the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs, or against the surviving defendant or defendants.  
3. Procedure in case of death of one of several plaintiffs or of sole plaintiff. —(1) Where one of two 
or more plaintiffs dies and the right to sue does not surviv e to the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or a 
sole plaintiff or sole surviving plaintiff dies and the right to the sue survives, the Court, on an application 
made in that behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the deceased plaintiff to be  made a party and shall 
proceed with the suit.  
(2) Where within the time limited by law no application is made under sub -rule ( 1), the suit shall 
abate so far as the deceased plaintiff is concerned, and, on the application of the defendant, the Court may 
award to him the costs which he may have incurred in defending the suit, to be recovered from the estate 
of the deceased plaintiff.  
4. Procedure in case of death of one of several defentlants or of sole defendant. —(1) Where one 
of two or more defendants die s and the right to sue does not survive against the surviving defendant or 
defendants alone or a sole defendant or sole surviving defendant dies and the right to sue survives, the 
Court, on an application made in that behalf, shall cause the legal represen tative of the deceased 
defendants to be made a party and shall proceed with the suit.  
(2) Any person so made a party may make any defence appropriate to his character as legal 
representative of the deceased defendant.  
(3) Where within the time limited by l aw no application is made under sub -rule ( 1), the suit shall 
abate as against the deceased defendant.  176 
 1[(4) The Court whenever it thinks fit, may exempt the plaintiff from the necessity of substituting the 
legal representatives of any such defendant who ha s failed to file a written statement or who, having filed 
it, has failed to appear and contest the suit at the hearing; and judgment may, in such case, be pronounced 
against the said defendant notwithstanding the death of such defendant and shall have the same force and 
effect as if it has been pronounced before death took place.  
(5) Where — 
(a) the plaintiff was ignorant of the death of a defendant, and could not, for that reason, make an 
application for the substitution of the legal representative of the d efendant under this rule within the 
period specified in the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), and the suit has, in consequence, ab ated, and  
(b) the plaintiff applies after the expiry of the period specified therefore in the Limitation Act, 
1963 (36 of 196 3), for setting aside the abatement and also for the admission of that application under 
section 5 of that Act on the ground that he had, by reason of such ignorance, sufficient cause for not 
making the application with the period specified in the said Act , 
the Court shall, in considering the application under the said section 5, have due regard to the fact of such 
ignorance, if proved.]  
2[4A. Procedure where there is no legal representative. —(1) If, in any suit, it shall appear to the Court 
that any party who has died during the pendency of the suit has no legal representative, the Court may, on the 
application of any party to the suit, proceed in the absence of a person representing the estate of the deceased 
person, or may be order appoint the Administrat or-General, or an officer of the Court or such other person as it 
thinks fit to represent the estate of the deceased person for the purpose of the suit; and any judgment or order 
subsequently given or made in the suit shall bind the estate of the deceased person to the same extent as he 
would have been bound if a personal representative of the deceased person had been a party to the suit.  
(2) Before making an order under this rule, the Court — 
(a) may require notice of the application for the order to be giv en to such (if any) of the persons 
having an interest in the estate of the deceased person as it thinks fit; and  
(b) shall as certain that the person proposed to be appointed to represent the estate of the deceased 
person is willing to be so appointed and has no interest adverse to that of the deceased person.]  
5. Determination of question as to legal representative. —Where  a question arises as to whether 
any person is or is not the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or a deceased defendant, such 
question shall be determined by the Court:  
1[Provided that where such question arises before an Appellate Court, that Court may, before 
determining the question, direct any subordinate Court to try the question and to return the records 
together with eviden ce, if any, recorded at such trial, its findings and reasons therefor, and the Appellate 
Court may take the same into consideration in determining the question.]  
6. No  abatement by reason of death after hearing. —Notwithstanding  anything contained in the 
foregoing rules, whether the cause of action survives or not, there shall be no abatement by reason of the 
death of either party between the conclusion of the hearing and the pronouncing of the judgment, but 
judgment may in such case be pronounced notwithsta nding the death and shall have the same force and effect 
as if it had been pronounced before the death took place.  
7. Suit not abated by marriage of female party. —(1) The marriage of a female plaintiff or 
defendant shall not cause the suit to abate, but th e suit may notwithstanding be proceeded with the 
judgment, and, where the decree is against a female defendant, it may be executed against her alone.  
(2) Where the husband is by law liable for the debts of his wife, the decree may, with the permission 
of the Court, be executed against the husband also; and, in case of judgment for the wife, execution of the 
                                                      
1. Ins.  by Act 104 of 1976, s. 73 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 73 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  177 
 decree may, with such permission, be issued upon the application of the husband, where the husband is by 
law entitled to the subject -matter of the decre e. 
8. When plaintiff's insolvency bars suit. —(1) The insolvency of a plaintiff in any suit which the 
assignee or receiver might maintain for the benefit of his creditors, shall not cause the suit to abate, unless 
such assignee or receiver declines to conti nue the suit or (unless for any special reason the Court 
otherwise directs) to give security for the costs thereof within such time as the Court may direct.  
(2) Procedure where assignee fails to continue suit, or give security. —Where the assignee or 
receiv er neglects or refuses to continue the suit and to give such security within the time so ordered, the 
defendant may apply for the dismissal of the suit on the ground of the plaintiff's insolvency, and the Court 
may make an order dismissing the suit an awar ding to the defendant the costs which he has incurred in 
defending the same to be proved as a debt against the pla intiff’s estate.  
9. Effect of abatement or dismissal .—(1) Where a suit abates or is di smissed under this Order, no 
fresh suit shall be brought  on the same cause of action.  
(2) The plaintiff or the person claiming to be the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or the 
assignee or the receiver in the case of an insolvent plaintiff may apply for an order to set aside the abatement 
or dismiss al; and if it is proved that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from continuing the suit, the 
Court shall set aside the abatement or dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.  
(3) The provisions of Section 5 of the 1[Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877) ] shall apply to 
applications under sub -rule ( 2). 
2[Explanation. —Nothing  in this rule shall be construed as barring, in any later suit, a defence based 
on the facts which constituted the cause of action in the suit which ha d abated or had been dismissed 
under this Order.]  
10. Procedure in case of assignment before final order in suit .—(1) In other cases of an 
assignment, creation or devolution of any interest during the pendency of a suit, the suit may, by leave of 
the Court , be continued by or against the person to or upon whom such interest has come or devolved.  
(2) The attachment of a decree pending an appeal therefrom shall be deemed to be an interest entitling 
the person who procured such attachment to the benefit of sub -rule ( 1). 
 2[10A . Duty of pleader to communicate to Court death of a party. —Wherever a pleader 
appearing for a party to the suit comes to know of the death of that party, he shall inform the Court about 
it, and the Court shall thereupon give notice of suc h death to the other party, and , for this purpose, the 
contract between the pleader and the deceased party shall be deemed to subsist.]  
11. Application of Order to appeals. —In the application of this Order to appeals, so far as may be, 
the word “Plaintiff ” shall be held to include an appellant, the word “defendant” a respondant, and the 
word “suit ”an appeal.  
12. Application of Order to proceedings. —Nothing in rules 3, 4 and 8 shall apply to proceedings in 
execution of a decree or order.  
ORDER XXIII  
Withdraw al and Adjustment of Suits 
3[1. Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim .—(1) At any time after the institution 
of a suit, the plaintiff may as against all or any of the defendants abandon his suit or abandon a part of 
his claim : 
Provided that wh ere the plaintiff is a minor or other person to whom the provisions contained in 
rules 1 to 14 of Order XXXII extend, neither the suit nor any part of the claim shall be abandoned without 
the leave of the Court.  
                                                      
1. See now the Limitation Act, 1973 (36 of 1963), ss. 4 and 5.  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 73 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 74, ibid., for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  178 
 (2) An application for leave under the provi so to sub -rule ( 1) shall be accompanied by an affidavit 
of the next friend and also, if the minor or such other person is represented by a pleader, by a certificate of 
the pleader to the effect that the abandonment proposed is, in his opinion, for the bene fit of the minor or 
such other person.  
(3) Where the Court is satisfied, — 
(a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or  
(b) that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the 
subject matter of sui t or part of a claim,  
It may, on such terms as it thinks fit grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw from such suit or such part 
of the  claim  with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject -matter of such suit or such part of 
the claim.  
(4) Where the plaintiff — 
(a) abandons any suit or part of claim under sub -rule ( 1), or 
(b) withdraws from a suit or part of a claim without the permission referred to in sub -rule ( 3), 
he shall  be liable for such costs as the Court may award and shall be p recluded from instituting any fresh 
suit in respect of such subject -matter or such part of the claim.  
(5) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the Court to permit one of several plaintiffs to 
abandon a suit or part of a claim under sub -rule ( 1), or to withdraw, under sub -rule ( 3), any suit or part of 
a claim, without the consent of the other plaintiff.]  
1[1A.When transposition of defendants as plaintiffs may be permitted. —Where  a suit is 
withdrawn or abandoned by a plaintiff under rule 1, and a  defendant applies to be transposed as a plaintiff 
under rule 10 of Order I the Court shall, in considering such application, have due regard to the question 
whether the applicant has a substantial question to be decided as against any of the other defenda nts.] 
2. Limitation law not affected by first suit. —In any fresh suit instituted on permission granted 
under the last preceding rule, the plaintiff shall be bound by the law of limitation in the same manner as if 
the first suit had not been instituted.  
3. Compromise of suit. —Where  it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that a suit has been 
adjusted wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or compromise 1[in writing and signed by the parties] 
or where the defendant satisfied the plaintiff in respect to the whole or any part of the subject -matter of 
the suit, the Court shall order such agreement, compromise or satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a 
decree in accordance therewith 2[so far as it relates to the parties to the suit, whether or not t he subject -
matter of the agreement, com promise or satisfaction is the same as the subject -matter of the suit:]  
1[Provided that where it is alleged by one party and denied by the other that an adjustment or 
satisfaction has been arrived at, the Court shall decide the question; but not adjournment shall be granted 
for the purpose of deciding the question, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, thinks fit to grant 
such adjournment.]  
1[Explanation. — An agreement or compromise which is void or voidable un der the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), shall not he deemed to be lawful within the meaning of this rule.]  
1[3A. Bar to suit. —No suit shall lie to set aside a decree on the ground that the compromise on which 
the decree  is based was not lawful.  
3B. No agreement or compromise to be entered in a representative suit without leave of 
Court .—(1) No agreement or compromise in a representative suit shall be entered into without the leave 
of the Court expressly recorded in the proceedings; and any such agree ment or compromise entered into 
without the leave of the Court as recorded shall be void.  
(2) Below granting such leave, the Court shall give notice in such manner as it may think fit to such 
persons is as may appear to it to be interested in the suit.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 74 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 74, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  179 
 Explanation. —In this rule, “representative suit” means, — 
(a) a suit under Section 91 or Section 92,  
(b) a suit under rule 8 of Order I,  
(c) a suit in which the manager of an undivided Hindu family sues or is sued as representing the 
other members of the famil y, 
(d) any other suit in which the decree passed may, by virtue of the provisions of this Code or of 
any other law for the time being in force, bind any person who is not named as party to the suit.]  
4. Proceedings in execution of decrees not affected. —Nothing in this Order shall apply to any 
proceedings in execution of a decree or order.  
ORDER XXIV  
Payment into Court 
1. Deposit by defendant of amount in satisfaction of claim. —The defendant in any suit to recover a 
debt or damages may, at any stage of the s uit, deposit in Court such sum of money as he considers a 
satisfaction in full of the claim.  
2. Notice of deposit. —Notice of the deposit shall be given through the Court by the defendant to the 
plaintiff, and the amount of the deposit shall (unless the Cou rt otherwise directs) be paid to the plaintiff 
on his application.  
3. Interest on deposit not allowed to plaintiff after notice. —No interest shall be allowed to the 
plaintiff on any sum deposited by the defendant from the date of the receipt of such notice , whether the 
sum deposited is in full of the claim or falls short thereof.  
4. Procedure where plaintiff accepts deposit as satisfaction in part .—(1) Where the plaintiff 
accepts such amount as satisfaction in part only of his claim, he may prosecute his su it for the balance; 
and, if the Court decides that the deposit by the defendant was a full satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim, 
the plaintiff shall pay the costs of the suit incurred after the deposit and the costs incurred previous 
thereto, so far as th ey were caused by excess in the plaintiff's claim.  
(2) Procedure where he accepts it as satisfaction in full. —Where the plaintiff accepts such amount as 
satisfaction in full of his claim, he shall present to the Court a statement to that effect, and such s tatement 
shall be filed and the Court shall pronounce judgment accordingly; and, in directing by whom the costs of 
each party are to be paid, the Court shall consider which of the parties is most to blame for the litigation.  
Illustrations  
(a) A owes B Rs. 100. B. sues A for the amount, having made no demand for payment and having no reason to believe 
that the  delay caused by making a demand would place him at a disadvantage. On the plaint being filed , A pays the money into 
Court, B accepts it in full satisf action of his claim, but the Court should not allow him any costs, the litigation being presumably 
groundless on his part.  
(h) B sues A under the circumstances mentioned in illustration (a). On the plaint being filed , A disputes the claim 
Afterwards A pays  the money into Court. B accepts in full satisfaction of his claim. The Court should also give B his cast of suit. 
A's conduct having shown that the litigation was necessary.  
(c) A owes B Rs. 100, and is willing to pay him that sum without suit. - B claims Rs. 150 and sues A for that amount. On the plaint 
being filed, A pays Rs. 100 into Court and disputes only his liability to pay the remaining Rs. 50. B accepts the Rs. 100 in full satisfaction of 
his claim. The Court should order him to pay A's costs.  
ORDE R XXV  
Security for Costs 
1[1. When security for costs may be required from plaintiff. —(1) At any stage of a suit, the Court 
may, either of its own motion or on the application of any defendant, order the plaintiff, for reasons to be 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14, for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).   180 
 recorded, to give withi n the time fixed by it security for the payment of all costs incurred and likely to be 
incurred by any defendant:  
Provided that such an order shall be made in all cases in which it appears to the Court that a sole 
plaintiff is, or (when there are more plai ntiffs than one) that all the plaintiffs are, residing out of India and 
that such plaintiff does not possess or that no one of such plaintiffs possesses any sufficient immovable 
property within India other than the property in suit.  
 
(2) Whoever leaves Ind ia under such circumstances as to afford reasonable probability that he will 
not be forthcoming whenever he may be called upon to pay costs shall be deemed to be residing out of 
India within the meaning of the proviso to sub -rule ( 1)]. 
2. Effect of failure  to furnish security .—(1) In the event of such security not being furnished within 
the time fixed, the Court shall make an order dismissing the suit unless the plaintiff or plaintiffs are 
permitted to withdraw therefrom.  
(2) Where a suit is dismissed under  this rule, the plaintiff may apply for an order to set the dismissal 
aside and, if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from 
furnishing the security within the time allowed, the Court shall set aside the dismissal upon such terms as 
to security; costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
(3) The dismissal shall not be set aside unless notice of such application has been served on the 
defendant.  
ORDER XXVI  
COMMISSIONS  
Commissions to examine witnesses  
1. Cases in which Court may issue commission to examine witness. —Any Court may in any suit 
issue a commission for the examination on interrogatories or otherwise of any person resident within the 
local limits o f its jurisdiction who is exempted under this Code from attending the Court or who is from 
sickness or infirmity unable to attend it : 
1[Provided that a commission for examination on interrogatories shall not be issued unless the 
Court, for reasons to be re corded, thinks it necessary so to do.  
Explanation. —The Court may, for the purpose of this rule, accept a certificate purporting to be 
signed by a registered medical practitioner as evidence of the sickness or inf irmity of any person, without 
calling the me dical practitioner as a witness.]  
2. Order for commission. —An order for the issue of a commission for the examination of a witness 
may be made by the Court either of its own motion or on the application, supported by affidavit or 
otherwise, of any party to  the suit or of the witness to be examined.  
3. Where witness resides within Court ’s jurisdiction. —A commission for the examination of a 
person who resides within the local limits of the ju risdiction of the Court issuing the same may be issued 
to any person  whom the Court thinks fit to execute it.  
4. Persons for whose examination commission may issue .—(1) Any  Court may in any suit issue a 
commission 2[for the examination on interrogatories or otherwise of —] 
(a) any person resident beyond the local limits of its jurisdiction;  
(b) any person who is about to leave such limits before the date on which he is required to be 
examined in Court; and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 75, ibid., for “for the examination of” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  181 
 (c) 1[any person in the service of the Government] who cannot in the opinion of the Court, attend 
without detriment to t he public service:  
1[Provided that where, under rule 19 of Order XVI, a person cannot be ordered to attend a Court in 
person, a commission shall be issued for his examination if his evidence is considered necessary in the 
interests of justice:  
Provided fur ther that a commission for examination of such person on interrogatories shall not be 
issued unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, thinks it necessary so to do.]  
(2) Such commission may be issued to any Court, not being a High Court, within the loc al limits of 
whose jurisdiction such person resides, or to any pleader or other person whom the Court issuing the 
commission may appoint.  
(3) The Court on issuing any commission under this rule shall direct whether the commission shall be 
returned to itsel f or to any subordinate Court.  
2[4A. Commission for examination of any person resident within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court. —Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, any court may, in the 
interest of justice or for the expedit ious disposal of the case or for any other reason, issue commission in 
any suit for the examination, on interrogatories or otherwise, of any person resident within the local limits 
of its jurisdiction, and the evidence so recorded shall be read in evidence .] 
5. Commission or request to examine witness not within India. —Where  any Court to which 
application is made for the issue of a commission for the examination of a person residing at any place 
not within 3[India] is satisfied that the evidence of such per son is necessary, the Court may issue such 
commission or a letter of request.  
6. Court to examine witness pursuant to Commission. —Every Court receiving a commission for 
the examination of any person shall examine him or cause him to be examined pursuant th ereto.  
7. Return of commission with depositions of witnesses. —Where a commission has been duly 
executed, it shall be returned, together with the evidence taken under it, to the Court from which it was 
issued, unless the order for issuing the commission has  otherwise directed, in which case the commission 
shall be returned in terms of such order; and the commission and the returned thereto and the evidence 
taken under it shall 4[(subject to the provisions of rule 8)] from part of the record of the suit.  
8. W hen depositions may be read in evidence. —Evidence  taken under a commission shall not be 
read as evidence in the suit without the consent of the party against whom the same is offered, unless —  
(a) the person who gave the evidence is beyond the jurisdiction  of the Court, or dead or unable 
from sickness or inf irmity to attend to be personally examined, or exempted from personal 
appearance in Court, or is a 5[person in the service of the Government] who cannot, in the opinion of 
the Court, attend without detri ment to the public service, or  
(b) the Court in its discretion dispenses with the proof of any of the circumstances mentioned in 
clause ( a)and authorizes the evidence of any person being read as evidence in the suit, notwithstanding 
proof that the cause fo r taking such evidence by commission has ceased at the time of reading the same.  
Commissions for local investigations  
9. Commissions to make local investigations. —In any suit in which the Court deems a local 
investigation to be requisite or proper for the purpose of elucidating any matter in dispute, or of 
ascertaining the market -value of any property, or the amount of any mesne profits or damages or annual 
net profits, the Court may issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit directing him to make s uch 
investigation and to report thereon to the Court:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O 1937, for “any civil or military officer of the Government”.  
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”.  
4. Subs. by Act 10 4 of 1976, s. 75, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “civil or military officer of the Government”.  
 182 
 Provided that, where the State Government has made rules as to the persons to whom such 
commission shall be issued, the Court shall be bound by such rules.  
10. Procedure of Commissioner .—(1) The Commiss ioner, after such local inspection as he deems 
necessary and after reducing to writing the evidence taken by him, shall return such evidence, together 
with his report in writing signed by him, to the Court.  
(2) Report and depositions to be evidence in suit . Commissioner may be examined in person. —The 
report of the Commissioner and the evidence taken by him (but not the evidence without the report) shall be 
evidence in the suit and shall form part of the record; but the Court or, with the permission of the Court, any of  the 
parties to the suit may examine the Commissioner personally in open Court touching any of the matters 
referred to him or mentioned in his report, or as to his report, or as to the manner in which he has made 
the investigation.  
(3) Where th e Court is for any reason dissatisfied with the proceedings of the Commissioner, it may 
direct such further inqu iry to be made as it shall think fit.  
1[Commissions for scientific investigation, performance of ministerial act and sale of movable 
property  
10A. Commission for scientific investigation .—(1) Where any question arising in a suit involves any 
scientific investigation which cannot, in the opinion of the Court, be conveniently conducted before the 
Court, the Court may, if it thinks it necessary or ex pedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a 
commission to such person as it thinks fit, directing him to inquire into such question and report thereon to 
the Court.  
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall, as far as may be, apply in rel ation to a Commissioner 
appointed under this rule as they apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under rule 9.  
10B. Commission for performance of a ministerial act .—(1) Where any question arising in a suit 
involves the performance of any ministerial  act which cannot, in the opinion of the Court, be conveniently 
performed before the Court, the Court may, if for reasons to be recorded, it is of opinion that it is 
necessary or expedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to such pe rson as it thinks 
fit, directing him to perform that ministerial act and report thereon to the Court.  
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall apply in relation to a commissioner appointed under 
this rule as they apply in relation to a Commissione r appointed under rule 9.  
10C. Commission for the sale of movable property .—(1) Where, in any suit, it becomes necessary 
to sell any movable property which is in the custody of the Court pending the determination of the suit 
and which cannot be convenientl y preserved, the Court may, if, for reasons to be recorded, it is of opinion 
that it is necessary or expedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to such person as it 
thinks fit, directing him to conduct such sale and report thereon t o the Court.  
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under 
this rule as they apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under rule 9.  
(3) Every such sale shall be held, as far as may be, in accorda nce with the procedure prescribed for 
the sale of movable property in execution of a decree.]  
Commissions to examine accounts  
11. Commission to examine or adjust accounts. —In any suit in which an examination or 
adjustment of the accounts is necessary, the Court may issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit 
directing him to make such examination or adjustment.  
12. Court to give Commissioner necessary instructions .—(1) The Court shall furnish the 
Commissioner with such part of the proceedings and suc h instructions as appear necessary, and the 
instructions shall distinctly specify whether the commissioner is merely to transmit the proceedings which 
he may hold on the inquiry, or also to report his own opinion on the point referred for his examination.  
(2) Proceedings and report to be evidence. Court may direct further inquiry. —The proceedings 
and report (if any) of the Commissioner shall be evidence in the suit, but where the Court has reason to be 
dissatisfied with them, it may direct such further inqu iry as it shall think fit.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  183 
 Commissions to make partitions  
13. Commission to make partition of immovable property .—Where  a preliminary decree for partition 
has been passed , the Court may, in any case not provided for by section 54, issue a commission to suc h 
person as it thinks fit to make the partition or separation according to the rights as declared in such decree.  
14. Procedure of Commissioner. —(1) The Commissioner shall, after such inquiry as may be necessary, 
divide the property into as many shares as may be directly by the order under which the commission was  
issued, and shall allot such shares to the parties, and may, if authorised thereto by the said order, award 
sums to be paid for the purpose of equalizing the value of the shares.  
(2) The commissio ner shall then prepare and sign a report or the Commissioners (where the 
commission was issued to more than one person and they cannot agree) shall prepare and sign separate 
reports appointing the share of each party and distinguishing each share (if so di rected by the said order) by 
metes and bounds. Such report or reports shall be annexed to the commission and transmitted to the Court; 
and the Court, after hearing any objections which the parties may make to the report or reports, shall 
confirm, vary or s et aside the same.  
(3) Where the Court confirms or varies the report or reports it shall pass a decree in accordance with 
the same as confirmed or varied; but where the Court sets aside the report or reports it shall either issue a 
new commission or make s uch other order as it shall think fit.  
General provisions  
15. Expenses of commission to be paid into court. —Before  issuing any commission under this 
Order, the Court may order such sum (if any) as it thinks reasonable for the expenses of the commission 
to be, within a time to be fixed, paid into Court by the party at whose instance or for whose benefit the 
commission is issued . 
16. Powers of commissioners. —Any commissioner appointed under this Order may, unless 
otherwise directed by the order of appointment ,—  
(a) examine the parties themselves and any witness whom they or any of them may produce, and 
any other person whom the Commissioner thinks proper to call upon to give evidence in the matter 
referred to him;  
(b) call for and examine documents and other things relevant to the subject of inquiry;  
(c) at any reasonable time enter upon or into any land or building mentioned in the order.  
1[16A. Questions objected to before the Commissioner .—(1) Where any question put to a witness is 
objected to by a party or  his pleader in proceedings before a Commissioner appointed under this Order, the 
Commissioner shall take down the question, the answer, the objections and the name of the party or, as the 
case may be, the pleader so objecting:  
Provided that the Commission er shall not take down the answer to a question which is objected to on 
the ground of privilege but may continue with the examination of the witness, leaving the party to get the 
question of privilege decided by the Court, and, where the Court decides that  there is no question of 
privilege, the witness may be recalled by the Commissioner and examined by him or the witness may be 
examined by the Court with regard to the question which was objected to on the ground of privilege.  
(2) No answer taken down under  sub-rule ( 1) shall be read as evidence in the suit except by the order 
of the Court.]  
17. Attendance and examination of witnesses before Commissioner .—(1) The provisions of this Code 
relating to the summoning, attendance and examination of witnesses, and to the remuneration of, and 
penalties to be imposed upon, witnesses, shall apply to persons required to give evidence or to produce 
documents under this Order whether the commission in execution of which they are so required has been 
issued by a Court situ ate within or by a Court situate beyond the limits of 2[India], and for the purposes of 
this rule the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a Civil Court:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951,  s. 3, for “the States”.  
 184 
 1[Provided that when the Commissioner is not a Judge of a Civil Court, he shall not be competent to 
impo se penalties; but such penalties may be imposed on the application of such Commissioner by the 
Court by which the commission was issued.]  
(2) A Commissioner may apply to any Court (not being a High Court) within the local limits or 
whose jurisdiction a wit ness resides for the issue of any process which he may find it necessary to issue to 
or against such witness, and such Court may, in its discretion, issue such process as it considers reasonable 
and proper.  
 
18. Parties to appear before Commissioner. —(1) Where a commission is issued under this Order, 
the Court shall direct that the parties to the suit shall appear before the Commissioner in person or by their 
agents or pleaders.  
(2) Where all or any of the parties do not so appear, the Commissioner may proc eed in their 
absence.  
1[18A. Application of order to execution proceedings. —The provisions of this Order shall apply, 
so far as may be , to proceedings in execution of a decree or order.  
18B. Court to fix a time for return of commission. —The Court issuing a  commission shall fix a 
date on or before which the commission shall be returned to it after execution, and the date so fixed 
shall not be extended except where the Court, for reasons to be recorded, is satisfied that there is 
sufficient cause for extendin g the date.]  
2[Commissions issued of the instance of foreign Tribunals  
19. Cases in  which High Court may issue commission to examine witness .—(1) If a High Court is 
satisfied. —  
(a) that a foreign court situated in a foreign country wishes to obtain the ev idence of a witness in 
any proceeding before it,  
(b) that the proceeding is of a civil nature, and  
(c) that the witness is residing within the limits of the High Court ’s appellate jurisdiction,  
it may, subject to the provisions of rule 20, issue a commissi on for the examination of such witness.  
(2) Evidence may be given of the matters specified in clause ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -rule ( 1)—  
(a) by a certificate signed by the consular officer of the foreign country of the highest rank in 
India  and transmitted to the High Court through the Central Government, or  
(b) by a letter of request issued by the foreign Court and transmitted to the High Court through 
the Central Government, or  
(c) by a letter of request issued by the foreign court and produced before the High Court by a 
party to the proceeding.  
20. Application for issue of commission. —The High Court may issue a commission under rule 19 — 
(a) upon application by a party to the proceeding before the foreign court , or 
(b) upon an application by a law officer o f the State Government acting under instructions from 
the State Government.  
21. To whom commission may be issued. —A commission under rule 19 may be issued to any Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the witness resides, or 3*** the  witness r esides within the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 1932, s. 3.  
3. The words “the high Court is established under the Indian high Courts Act 1861, or the Government of India Act, 1915, and ” 
omitted by the A.O. 1937.  185 
 local limits of 1[the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court], to any person whom the Court 
thinks fit to execute the commission.  
22. Issue, execution and return of commissions, land transmission of evidence to foreign 
Court.—The provisions of rules 6, 15, 2[sub-rule ( 1) of rule 16A, 17, 18 and 18B] of this Order in so 
far as they are applicable shall apply to the issue, execution and return of such commissions, and when 
any such commission has, been duly executed it shall be returned, together with the evidence taken 
under it, to the High Court, which shall forward it to the Government  General in Council along with 
the letter of request for transmission to the foreign court. ] 
ORDER XXVII  
Suits by or against the government o r public officers in their official capacity  
1. Suits by or against Government. —In any suit by or against 3[the Government], the plaint or 
written statement shall be signed by such person as the Government may, by general or special order, 
appoint in this behalf, and shall be verified by any person whom the Government may so appoint and who 
is acquainted with the facts of the case.  
2. Persons authorised to act for Government. —Persons being  ex officio or otherwise authorised to act 
for the Government in resp ect of any judicial proceeding shall be deemed to be recognised agents by whom 
appearances, acts and applications under this Code may be made or done on behalf of the Government.  
3. Plaints in suits by or against Government. —In suits  by or 4[against the  Government], instead of 
inserting in the plaint the name and description and place of residence of the plaintiff or defendant, it shall 
be sufficient to insert 1[the appropriate name as provided in section 79 5***].  
6[4. Agent for Government to receive proce ss.—The Government pleader in any Court shall be the 
agent of the Government for the purpose of receiving processes against the Government issued by such 
Court].  
5. Fixing of day for appearance on behalf of Government. —The Court, in fixing the day for 1[the 
Government] to answer to the plaint, shall allow a reasonable time for the necessary communication with 
the Government through the proper channel, and for the issue of instructions to the 7[Government pleader] 
to appear and answer on behalf of 8[the Gove rnment] 9***, and may extend the time at its discretion 10[but 
the time so extended shall not exceed two months in the aggregate].  
8[5A. Government to be joined as a party in a suit against a public officer. —Where a suit is 
instituted against a public offic er for damages or other relief in respect of any act alleged to have been 
done by him in his official capacity, the Government shall be joined as a party to the suit.  
5B. Duty of Court in suits against the Government or a public officer to assist in arrivi ng at a 
settlement .—(1) In every suit or proceeding to which the Government, or a public officer acting in his 
official capacity, is a party, it shall be the duty of the Court to make, in the first instance, every 
endeavour, where it is possible to do so c onsistently with the nature and circumstances of the case, to 
assist the parties in arriving at a settlement in respect of the subject -matter of the suit.  
                                                      
1. Subs. ibid.,  for “its ordinary original civil jur isdiction ”. 
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 75 , for “16, 17 and 18 ” (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by A. O. 1937, for “the Secretary of State for India in Council”.  
5. Subs.  ibid., for “again st the Secretary of State for India in Council ”. 
6. The words ‘or’ if the suit is against the Secretary of State, the words “the Secretary of State” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for rule 4.  
8. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Crown plea der” which had been subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “Government pleader”.  
9. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “the said Secretary of State, for India in Council”.  
10. The words “or the Government,” omitted by the A. O. 1948.  
11. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 76 (w.e .f. 1-2-1977).  186 
 (2) If, in any such suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to the court that there is a reasona ble 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Court may adjourn the proceeding for such period as it 
thinks fit, to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.  
(3) The power conferred under sub -rule ( 2) is in addition to any other po wer of the Court to adjourn 
proceedings.].  
6. Attendance of person able to answer questions relating to suit against Government. —The 
Court may also, in any case in which the 5[Government pleader] is not accompanied by any person on the 
part of 1[the Govern ment] who may be able to answer any material questions relating to the suit, direct the 
attendance of such a person.  
 
7. Extension of time to enable public officer to make reference to Government .—(1) Where the 
defend ant is a public officer and, on receivi ng the summons, considers it proper to make a reference to the 
Government before answering the pla int, he may apply to the Court to grant such extension of  the time 
fixed in the summons as may be necessary to enable him to make such reference and to receiv e orders 
thereon through the proper channel.  
(2) Upon such application the Court shall extend the time for so long as appears to it to be necessary.  
8. Procedure in suits against public officer. —(1) Where the Government undertakes the defence of 
a suit aga inst a public officer, the 1[Government pleader] upon being furnished with authority to appear 
and answer the plaint, shall apply to the court, and upon such application the Court shall cause a note of 
his authority to be entered in the register of civil s uits. 
(2) Where no application under sub -rule (1) is made by the 1[Government pleader] on or before the 
day fixed in the notice for the defendant to appear and answer, the case shall proceed as in a suit between 
private parties:  
Provided that the defendant  shall not be liable to arrest, nor his property to attachment, otherwise than 
in execution of a decree.  
2[8A. No security to be required from Government or a public officer in certain cases. —No such 
security as is mentioned in rules 5 and 6 of Order XLI s hall be required from the Government or, where 
the Government has undertaken the defence of the suit, from any public officer sued in respect of an act 
alleged to be done by him in his official capacity.  , 
8B. Definitions of “Government” and “ Government pl eader”. —In this Order 3[unless otherwise 
expressly provided] “Government” and 1[“Government pleader”] mean respectively —  
(a) in relation to any suit by or against 4*** the Central Government, or against a public officer in 
the service of that Government, the Central Government and such pleader as that Government may 
appoint whether generally or specially for the purposes of this order;  
5*   *   *   *  * 
(c) in relation to any suit by or against State Government or against a public officer in the service 
of a State. the State Government and the Government pleader 6[as defined in clause ( 7) of section 2], 
or such other pleader as the State Government may appoint, whether generally or specially , for the 
purposes of this Order.].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XXVII. — In the First  Schedule,  in Order  XXVII  — 
(a) in the marginal heading after the words “official capacity”  the words  “or 
Statutory  Authorities,  etc.”  shall  be inserted  ; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 and the A. O. 1950, for “Crown pleader”. 
2. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
3. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
4. The words “the Secretary of State or” omitted by the A.O.1948.  
5. Cl. ( b) omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
6. Ins. by the A.O.  1950.  187 
 (b) after rule 9, as inserted by the Allahabad High Court, the  followin g rule shall  
be inserted,  namely  :— 
“10.  Suits  by or against  statutory  authorities  — 
(1) Any authority or Corporation, constituted by or under any  law, may, from time to 
time appoint a Standing Counsel, to be called  corporation  pleader  of that authority,  
in any district  and give  information  of such  appointment  to the District  Judge.  
(2) The Corporation pleader so appointed shall be the  agent  in  that district of the 
appointing authority or Corporation for purposes of  receiving  processes  against  it,  
but  shall not  act or plead  without  filing  a Vakalatnama  or memorandum  of 
appearance.”  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 56 of 1976, s. 11] ] 
1[ORDER XXVII -A] 
Suits involving a substantial question of law as to the interpretation for  2[the constitution ] 3[or as to the 
validi ty of any statutory instrument ] 
1. Notice to the Attorney General or the Advocate -General. —In any suit in which it appears to the 
Court that 4[any such question as is referred to 5[in clause (1) of Article 132, read with Article 147 of the 
Constitution,] i s involved, the Court shall not proceed to determine that question until after notice has 
been given to 6[the Attorney General for India] if the question of law concerns the Central Government 
and to the Advocate -General of the State if the question of law  concerns a State Government.  
9[1A. Procedure in suits involving validity of any statutory instrument. —In any suit in which it 
appears to the Court that any question as to the validity of any statutory instrument, not being a question of  the 
nature mention ed in rule l, is involved, the Court shall not proceed to determine that question except after 
giving notice —  
(a) to the Government pleader, if the question concern the Government, or  
(b) to the authority which issued the statutory instrument, if the ques tion concerns an authority 
other than Government.]  
2. Court may add Government as party. —The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order that 
the Central Government or a State Government shall be added as a defendant in any suit involving 7[any 
such qu estion as is referred to 8[in clause ( 1) of Article 132 read with Article 147, of the Constitution]], if 
9[the Attorney General for India] or the Advocate -General of the State, as the case may  be, whether upon 
receipt of notice under rule 1, or otherwise, applies for such addition and the Court is satisfied that such 
addition is necessary or desirable for the satisfactory determination of the question of law  involved.  
10[2A. Power of Court to add Government or other authority as a defendant in a suit relatin g to the 
validity of any statutory instrument. —The Court may, at any stage of the proceedings in any suit involving 
any such question as is referred to in rule 1A, order that the Government or other authority shall be added as a 
defend ant if the Government  pleader or the pleader appearing in the case for the authority which issued the 
instrument, as the case may be, whether upon receipt of notice under rule lA or otherwise, applies for such 
addition, and the Court is satisfied that such addition is necessar y or desirable for the satisfactory 
determination of the question.] 
11[3. Costs. —Where,  under rule 2 or rule 2A the Government or any other authority is added as a 
defendant in a suit, the Attorney -General, Advocate -General, or Government Pleader or Governm ent or 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 1942 , s. 2.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Government of India Act, 1935, or any Order -in-Council made thereunder”.  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 77 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, f or “substantial question o f law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935 , or any 
Order -in-Council made thereunder”.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, “In sub -section ( 1) of section 205 of the Government of India Act, 1935”.  
6. Subs. ibid.,  for “the Advocate -General of  India”.  
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for “a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935 o r any 
Order -in-Council made thereunder”.  
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “in sub -section ( 1) of section 205 of the Governm ent of India Act, 1935”.  
9. Subs., ibid., for “the Advocate -General of India”.  
10. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 77 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
11. Subs. by s. 77, ibid., for rule 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  188 
 other authority shall not be entitled to, or liable for, costs in the Court which ordered the addition unless 
the Court, having regard to all the circumstances of the case for any special reason, otherwise orders.] 
4. Application of Order to appeals .—In the application of this Order to appeals the word 
“defendant” shall be held to include a respondent and the word “suit” an appeal.  
4[Explanation .—In this Order, “statutory instrument” means a rule, notification, bye -law, order, 
scheme or form made as specified under any enactment.] 
ORDER XXVIII  
Suits by or against military  1[or naval ] men 2[or airmen ] 
1. Officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen who cannot obtain leave may authorise any person to sue or 
defend for them. —(1) Where any officer, 3[soldier, 6[sailor] or airman] actually 4[serving under the 
Government] in 5[such] capacity is a party to a suit, and cannot obtain leave of absence for the purpose of 
prosecuting or defending the suit in person, he may authorise any person to sue or defend in his ste ad. 
(2) The authority shall be writing and shall be signed by the officer, 6[soldier, 7[sailor] or airman] in 
the presence of ( a) his commanding officer, or the next subordinate officer, if the party is himself the 
commanding officer, or ( b) where the offi cer, 1[soldier, 2[sailor] or airman,] is serving in military, 
2[naval], 8[or air force] staff employment, the head or other superior officer of the office in which he is 
employed. Such commanding or other officer shall countersign the authority, which shal l be filed in 
Court.  
(3) When so filed the countersignature  shall be sufficient proof that the authority was duly executed, 
and that the officer, 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or air man] by whom it was granted could not obtain leave of 
absence for the purpose of prosecuting of defending the suit in person.  
Explanation. —In this Order the expression “commanding officer” means the officer in actual 
command for the time being of any regiment, corps, 2[ship,] detachment or depot to which the officer, 
1[soldier 2[, sail or] or airman] belongs.  
2. Person so authorised may act personally or appoint pleader. —Any person authorised by an 
officer, 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or airman] to prosecute or defend a suit in his stead may prosecute or defend it 
in person in the same manner as the officer, 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or airman] could do if present; or he may 
appoint a pleader to prosecute or defend the suit on behalf of such officer, 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or airman].  
3. Service on person so authorised, or on his pleader, to be good  service. —Processes served upon 
any person authorised by an officer 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or airman] under rule 1 or upon any pleader 
appointed as aforesaid by such person shall he as effectual as if they had been served on the party in 
person.  
 
ORDER XXIX  
Suits by or against corporations  
1. Subscription and verification of pleading. —In suits by or against a corporation, any pleading 
may be signed and verified on behalf of the corporation by the secretary or by any director or other 
principal officer of the  corporation who is able to depose to the facts of the case.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch. 
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First  Sch. 
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., and the First Sch., for “or soldier” and “or a soldier”.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “serving the Government”.  
5. Subs. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch., for “a military or air force”.  
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch. for “or soldier”.  
7. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and  the Sch. 
8. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the Sch. 189 
 2. Service on corporation. —Subject  to any statutory provision regulating service of process, where 
the suit is against a corporation, the summons may be served —  
(a) on the secretary, or on any d irector, or other principal officer of the corporation, or  
(b) by leaving it or sending it by post addressed to the corporation at the registered office, or 
if there is no registered office then at the place where the corporation carries on business.  
3. Po wer to require personal attendance of officer of corporation. —The Court may, at any stage 
of the suit, require the personal appearance of the secretary or of any director, or other principal officer of 
the corporation who may be able to answer material que stions relating to the suit.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order XXIX. — In the First Schedule, in Order XXIX, in rule 2, after clause  (a), the following  
clause  shall  be inserted,  namely  :— 
“(aa) on its corporation pleader in the district where  the Court  issuing  summons  is located,  if one has 
been  appointed  and the appointment  has been  notified  to the District  Judge  under  rule  10  of  Order  XXVII,  
or.” 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 12]  
ORDER XXX  
Suits by or against firms and persons car rying on business in          
names other than their own  
1. Suing of partners in name of firm. —(1) Any two or more persons claiming or being liable as 
partners and carrying on business in,  1[India] may sue or be sued in the name of the firm (if any) of whi ch 
such persons were partners at the time of the accruing of the cause of action, and any party to a suit may in 
such case apply to the Court for a statement of the names and addresses of the persons who were, at the 
time of the accruing of the cause of ac tion, partners in such firm, to be furnished and verified in such 
manner as the Court may direct.  
(2) Where persons sue or ar e sued partners in the name of their firm under sub -rule ( 1), it shall, in the 
case of any pleading or other document required by o r under this Code to be signed, verified or certified 
by the plaintiff of the defendant, suffice such pleading or other document is signed, verified or certified 
by any one of such persons.  
2. Disclosure of partners’ names. —(1) Where a suit is instituted b y partners in the name of their 
firm, the plaintiffs or their pleader shall, on demanding writing by or on behalf of any defendant, 
forthwith declare in writing the names and places of residence of all the persons constituting the firm on 
whose behalf the suit is instituted.  
(2) Where the plaintiffs or their pleader fail to comply with any demand made under sub -rule ( 1) all 
proceedings in the suit may, upon an application for that purpose, be stayed upon such terms as the Court 
may direct.  
(3) Where  the nam es of the partners are declared in the manner referred to in sub -rule ( 1) the suit 
shall proceed in the same manner, and the same consequences in all respects shall follow, as if they had 
been named as plaintiffs in the plaint:  
2[Provided that all proceedi ngs shall nevertheless continue in the name of the firm, but the name of 
the partners disclosed in the manner specified in sub -rule ( 1) shall be entered in the decree.]  
3. Service. —Where  persons ar e sued as partners in the name of their firm, the summons s hall be 
served either —  
(a) upon any one or more of the partners, or  
(b) at the principal place at which the partnership business is carried on within 3[India] upon any 
person having, at the time of service, the control or management of the partnership bus iness, there , 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”.  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 78, for the proviso (w .e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States ”. 190 
 as the Court may direct; and such service shall be deemed good service upon the firm so sued, whether all 
or any of the partners ar e within or without 2[India]:  
Provided that, in the case of a partnership which has been dissolved to the knowl edge of the plaintiff 
before the institution of the suit, the summons shall be served upon every person within 2[India] whom it 
is sought to make liable.  
4. Rights of suit on death of partner. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 of the Ind ian 
Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872) where two or more persons may sue or be sued in the name of a firm under the 
foregoing provisions and any of such persons dies, whether before the institution or during the pendency of any 
suit, it shall not be necessary to join the legal representative of the deceased as a party to the suit.  
(2) Nothing in sub -rule ( 1) shall limit or otherwise effect any right which the legal representative of 
the deceased may have —  
(a) to apply to be made a party to the suit, or  
(b) to enforce any claim against the survivor or survivors.  
5. Notice in what capacity served. —Where  a summons is issued to a firm and is served in the manner 
provided by rule 3, every person upon whom it is served shall be informed by notice in writing given at the 
time of such service, whether he is served as a partner or as a person having the control or management of 
the partnership business, or in both characters, and , in default of such notice, the person served shall be 
deemed to be served as a partner.  
6. Appearance of partners. —Where  persons are sued as partners in the name of their firm, they 
shall appear individually in their own names, but all subsequent proceedings shall, nevertheless, continue 
in the name of the firm.  
7. No  appearance except by partne rs.—Where  a summons is served in the manner provided by  
rule 3 upon a person having the control or management of the partnership business, no appearance by him 
shall be necessary unless he is a partner of the firm sued.  
1[8. Appearance under protest. —(1) Any person served with summons as a partner under rule 3 
may enter an appearance under protest, denying that he was a partner at any material time.  
(2) On such appearance being made, either the plaintiff or the person entering the appearance may, at 
any ti me before the date fixed for hearing and final disposal of the suit, apply to the Court for determining 
whether that person was a partner of the firm and liable as such.  
(3) If, on such application, the Court holds that he was a partner at the material tim e, that shall not 
preclude the person from filing a defence denying the liability of the firm in respect of the claim against 
the defendant . 
(4) If the Court, however, holds that such person was not a partner of the firm and was not liable as 
such that sha ll not preclude the plaintiff from otherwise serving a summons on the firm and proceeding 
with the suit; but in that event, the plaintiff shall be precluded from alleging the liability of that person as 
a partner of the firm in execution of any decree that  may be passed against the firm.]  
9. Suits between co -partners. —This Order shall apply to suits between a firm and one or more of 
the partners therein and to suits between firms having one or more partners in common; but no execution 
shall be issued in suc h suits except by leave of the Court, and, on an application for leave to issue such 
execution, all such accounts and inquiries may be directed to be taken and made and directions given as 
may be just.  
2[10. Suit against person carrying on business in name  other than his own. —Any person carrying 
on business in a name or style other than his own name, or a Hindu undivided family carrying on business 
under any name, may be sued in such name or style as if it were a firm name, and, in so far as the nature 
of such case permits, all rules under this Order shall apply accordingly.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 78, for rule 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 78, for rule 10 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  191 
 ORDER XXXI  
Suits by or against trustees, executors and administrators  
1. Representation of beneficiaries in suits concerning property vested in trustees etc. —In all 
suits concerning pro perty vested in a trustee, executor or administrator, where the contention is between 
the persons beneficially interested in such property and a third person, the trustee, executor or 
Administrator shall represent the persons so interested, and it shall no t ordinarily be necessary to make 
them parties to the suit. But the Court may, if it thinks fit, order them or any of them to be made parties.  
2. Joinder of trustees, executors and administrators. —Where there are several trustees, executors 
or administrato rs, they shall all be made parties to a suit against one or more of them:  
Provided that the executors who have not proved their testator’s will, and trustees, executors and 
administrators outside 1[India], need not be made parties.  
3. Husband of married ex ecutrix not to join. —Unless the Court directs otherwise, the husband of a 
married trustee, administratrix or executrix shall not as such be a party to a suit by or against her.  
ORDER XXXII  
Suits by or against minors and persons of unsound mind  
1. Minor to sue by next friend. —Every suit by a minor shall be instituted in his name by a person 
who in such suit shall be called the next friend of the minor.  
2[Explanation. —In this Order, “minor” means a person who has not attained his majority within the 
meaning o f section 3 of the Indian Majority Act, 1875  (9 of 1875) where the suit relates to any of the 
matters mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( b) of section 2 of that Act or to any other matter.]  
2. Where suit is instituted without next friend, plaint to be taken off  the file. —(1) Where a suit is 
instituted by or on behalf of a minor without a next friend, the defendant may apply to have the plaint 
taken off the file, with costs to be paid by the pleader or other person by whom it was presented.  
(2) Notice of such app lication shall be given to such person, and the Court, after hearing his 
objections (if any) may make such order in the matter as it thinks fit.  
3[2A. Security to be furnished by next friend when so ordered. —(1) Where a suit has been 
instituted on behalf o f the minor by his next friend, the Court may, at any stage of the suit, either of its 
own motion or on the application of any defendant, and for reasons to be recorded, order the next friend 
to give security for the payment of all costs incurred or likely  to be incurred by the defendant.  
(2) Where such a suit is instituted by an indigent person , the security shall include the court -fees 
payable to the Government.  
(3) The provisions of rule 2 of Order XXV shall, so far as may be, apply to a suit where the C ourt 
makes an order under this rule directing security to be furnished.]  
3. Guardian for the suit to be appointed by Court for minor defendants. —(1) Where the 
defendant is a minor the Court, on being satisfied of the fact of his minority, shall appoint a p roper person 
to be guardian for the suit for such minor.  
(2) An order for the appointment of a guardian for the suit may be obtained upon application in the 
name and on behalf of the minor or by the plaintiff.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”.  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 79 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 79 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  192 
 (3) Such application shall be supported by an affidavit verifying the fact that the proposed guardian 
has no interest in the matters in controversy in the suit adverse to that of the minor and that he is a fit 
person to be so appointed.  
(4) Order shall be made on any application under this rule except  upon notice 1*** to any guardian of 
the minor appointed or declared by an authority competent in that behalf, or, where there is no such 
guardian 2[upon notice to the father or where there is no father, to the mother, or where there is no father 
or mother , to other natural guardian] of the minor, or, where there is 3[no father, mother or other natural 
guardian], to the person in whose care the minor is, and after hearing any objection which may be urged 
on behalf of any person served with notice under this  sub-rule. 
1[(4A) The Court may, in any case, if it thinks fit, issue notice under sub -rule ( 4) to the minor also.]  
3[(5) A person appointed under sub -rule ( 1) to be guardian for the suit for a minor shall, unless his 
appointment is terminated by retiremen t, removal or death, continue as such throughout all proceedings 
arising out of the suit including proceedings in any Appellate or Revisional Court and any proceedings in 
the execution of a decree.]  
1[3A. Decree against minor not to be set aside unless pre judice has been caused to his interest. —
(1) No decree passed against a minor shall be set aside merely on the ground that the next friend or 
guardian for the suit of the minor had an interest in the subject -matter of the suit adverse to that of the 
minor , but the fact that by reasons of such adverse interest of the next friend or guardian for the suit , 
prejudice has been caused to the interests of the minor, shall be a ground for setting aside the decree.  
(2) Nothing in this rule shall preclude the minor fr om obtaining any relief available under any law by 
reason of the misconduct or gross negligence on the part of the next friend or guardian for the suit 
resulting in prejudice to the interests of the minor.]  
4. Who may act as next friend or he appointed gua rdian for the suit —(1) Any person who is of 
sound mind and has attained majority may act as next friend of a minor or as his guardian for the suit:  
Provided that the interest of such person is not adverse to that of the minor and that he is not, in the 
case of a next friend , a defendant, or, in the case of a guardian for the suit, a plaintiff.  
(2) Where a minor has a guardian appointed or declared by competent authority, no person other than 
such guardian shall act as the next friend of the minor or be appo inted his guardian for the suit unless the 
Court considers, for reasons to be recorded, that it is for the minor ’s welfare that another person be 
permitted to act or be appointed, as the case may be.  
(3) No person shall without his consent 4[in writing] be  appointed guardian for the suit.  
(4) Where there is no other person fit and willing to act as guardian for the suit, the Court may 
appoint any of its officers to be such guardian, and may direct that the costs to be incurred by such officer 
in the perform ance of his duties as such guardian shall be borne either by the parties or by any one or 
more of the parties to the suit, or out of any fund in Court in which the minor is interested 1[or out of the 
property of the minor], and may gi ve directions  for the repayment or allowance of such costs as justice 
and the circumstances of the case may require.  
5. Representation of minor by next friend or guardian for the suit. —(1) Every application to the 
Court on behalf of a minor, other than an application under rule  10, sub -rule (2), shall be made by his next 
friend or by his guardian for the suit.  
(2) Every order made in a suit or on any application, before the Court in or which a minor is in any way 
concerned or affected, without such minor being represented by a n ext friend or guardian for the suit, as the 
case may be, may be discharged, and, where the pleader of the party at whose instance such order was 
                                                      
1. The words “to the minor and ” omitted by s. 79, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 79, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 6 of 1937 , s. 2. 
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 79 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  193 
 obtained knew, or might reasonably have known, the fact of such minority, with costs to be paid by such 
pleader . 
6. Receipt by next friend or guardian for the suit of property under decree for minor. —(1) A 
next friend or guardian for the suit shall not, without the leave of the Court, receive any money or other 
movable property on behalf of a minor either —  
(a) by way of compromise before decree or order, or  
(b) under a decree or order in favour of the minor.  
(2) Where the next friend or guardian for the suit has not been appointed or declared by competent 
authority to be guardian of the property of the minor, or, having been so appointed or declared, is under 
any disability known to the Court to receive the money or other movable property, the Court shall, if it 
grants him leave to receive the property, require such security and give such directions as will, in its  
opinion, sufficiently protect the property from waste and ensure its proper application :  
1[Provided that the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, dispense with such security while granting 
leave to the next friend or guardian for the suit to receive mo ney or other movable property under a 
decree or order , where such next friend or guardian —  
(a) is the manager of a Hindu undivided family and the decree or order relates to the property or 
business of the family; or  
(b) is the parent of the minor.]  
7. Agreement or compromise by next friend or guardian for the suit. —(1) No next friend or guardian 
for the suit shall, without the leave of the Court, expressly recorded in the proceedings, enter into any agreement 
or compromise on behalf of a minor with referen ce to the suit in which he acts as next friend or guardian.  
1[(1A) An application for leave under sub -rule (1) shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the next 
friend or the guardian for the suit, as the case may be, and also, if the minor is represented b y a pleader, 
by the certificate of the pleader, to the effect that the agreement or compromise proposed is, in his 
opinion, for the benefit of the minor :  
Provided that the opinion so expressed, whether in the affidavit or in the certificate shall not prec lude the 
Court from examining whether the agreement or compromise proposed is, for the benefit of the minor. ]  
(2) Any such agreement or compromise entered into without the leave of the Court so recorded shall 
be voidable against all parties other than the  minor:  
8. Retirement of next friend. —(1) Unless otherwise ordered by the Court, a next friend shall not retire 
without first procuring a fit person to be put in this place and giving security for the costs already incurred.  
(2) The application for the app ointment of a new next friend shall be supported by an affidavit 
showing the fitness of the person proposed and also that he has no interest adverse to that of the minor.  
9. Removal of next friend. —(1) Where the interest of the next friend of a minor is ad verse to that of the 
minor or where he is so connected with a defend ant whose interest is adverse to that of the minor as to make it 
unlikely that the minor's interest will be properly protected by him, or where he does not do his duty, or, 
during the pend ency of the suit, ceases to reside within 1[India], or for any other sufficient cause, application, 
may be made on behalf of the minor or by a defend ant for his removal; and the Court, if satisfied of the 
sufficiency of the cause assigned, may order the ne xt friend to be removed accordingly, and make such other 
order as to costs as it thinks fit.  
(2) Where the next friend is not a guardian appointed or declared by an authority competent in this 
behalf, and an application is made by a guardian so appointed o r declared, who desires to be himself 
appointed in the place of the next friend, the Court shall remove the next friend unless it considers, for 
reasons to be recorded by it, that the guardian ought not to be appointed the next friend of the minor, and 
shall thereupon appoint the applicant to be next friend in his place upon such terms as to the costs 
already incurred in the suit as it thinks fit.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3. for “the States”  194 
 10. Stay of proceedings on removal, etc., of next friend. —(1) On the retirement, removal or death of 
the next f riend of a minor, further proceedings shall be stayed until the appointment of a next friend in his 
place.  
(2) Where the pleader of such minor omits, within a reasonable time, to take steps to get  a new next 
friend appointed, any person interested in the m inor or in the matter in issue may apply to the Court for 
the appointment of one, and the Court may appoint such person as it thinks fit.  
11. Retirement, removal or death of guardian for the suit. —(1) Where the guardian for the suit 
desires to retire or do es not do his duty, or where other sufficient ground is made to appear, the Court 
may permit such guardian to retire or may remove him, and may make such order as to costs as it thinks 
fit. 
(2) Where the guardian for the suit, retires, dies or is removed b y the Court during the pendency of 
the suit, the Court shall appoint a new guardian in his place.  
12. Course to be followed by minor plaintiff or applicant on attaining majority. —(1) A minor 
plaintiff or a minor not a party to a suit on whose behalf an app lication is pending shall, on attaining majority, 
elect whether he will proceed with the suit or application.  
(2) Where lie elects to proceed with the suit or application, he shall apply for an order discharging 
the next friend and for leave to proceed in his own name.  
(3) The title of the suit or application shall in such case be corrected so as to read henceforth thus:  
“A.B., late a minor by C.D., his next friend, but now having attained majority.”.  
(4) Where he elects to abandon the suit or application,  he shall, if a sole plaintiff or sole applicant, 
apply for an order to dismiss the suit or application on repayment of the costs incurred by the defendant 
or opposite party or which may have been paid by his next friend . 
(5) Any application under this rul e may be made ex parte but no order discharging a next friend and 
permitting a minor plaintiff to proceed in his own name shall be made without notice to the next friend.  
13. Where minor co -plaintiff attaining majority desires to repudiate suit. —(1) Where a minor 
co-plaintiff on attaining majority desires to repudiate the suit, he shall apply to have his name struck out 
as co -plaintiff; and the Court, if it finds that he is not a necessary party, shall dismiss him from the suit 
on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.  
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on the next friend, on any co -plaintiff and on the defendant.  
(3) The costs of all parties of such application, and  of all or any proceedings theretofore had in the 
suit, shall be pa id by such persons as the Court directs.  
(4) Where the applicant is a necessary party to the suit, the Court may direct him to be made a defendant.  
14. Unreasonable or improper suit .—(1) A minor on attaining majority may, if a sole plaintiff, 
apply that a suit instituted in his name by his next friend be dismissed on the ground that it was 
unreasonable or improper.  
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on all the parties concerned; and the Court, upon being 
satisfied of such unreasonableness or impr opriety, may grant the application and order the next friend to 
pay the costs of all parties in respect of the application and of anything done in the suit, or make such 
other order as it thinks fit.  
1[15. Rules 1 to 14 (Except rule 2A) to apply to persons  of unsound mind. —Rules  1 to 14 (except                    
rule 2A) shall, so far as may be, apply to persons adjudged, before or during the pendency of the  suit, to be of 
unsound mind and shall also apply to persons who, though not so adjudged, are found by the C ourt on enquiry to 
be incapable, by reason of any mental infirmity, of protecting their interest when s uing being sued.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 79, for rule 15 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  195 
 1[16. Savings. —(1) Nothing contained in this Order shall apply to the Ruler of a foreign State suing 
or being sued in the  name of his State, or being sued by the direction of the Central Government in the 
name of an agent or in any other name.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Order shall be construed as affecting or in any way derogating from the 
provisions of any local law for the t ime being in force relating to suits by or against minors or by or 
against lunatics or other persons of unsound mind .] 
2[ORDER XXXII -A 
Suits relating to matters concerning the family  
1. Application of the Order. —(1)The provisions of this Order shall apply to suits or proceedings 
relating to matters concerning the family.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -rule ( 1), the 
provisions of this Order shall apply to the following suits or proceedings concerning the f amily, 
namely :— 
(a) a suit or proceeding for matrimonial relief, including a suit or proceedings for declaration as 
to the validity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of any person;  
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to legitimacy of any person;  
(c) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the custody of any minor 
or other member of the family, under a disability;  
(d) a suit or proceeding for maintenance;  
(e) a suit or proceeding as to the validity or effec t of an adoption;  
(f) a suit or proceeding, instituted by a member of the family, relating to wills, intestacy and 
succession;  
(g) a suit or proceeding relating to any other matter concerning the family in respect of which,  the 
parties are subject to their  personal law.  
(3) So much of this Order as relates to a matter provided for by a special law in respect of any suit or 
proceeding shall not apply to that suit or proceeding.  
2. Proceedings to be held in camera.—In every suit or proceeding to which this Or der applies, the 
proceedings may be held in camera if the Court so desires and shall be so held if either party so desires.  
3. Duty of Court to make efforts for settlement. —(1) In every suit or proceeding to which this 
Order applied, an endeavour shall be made by the Court in the first instance, where it is possible to do so 
consistent with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist the parties in arriving at a settlement. In 
respect of the subject -matter of the suit.  
(2) If, in any such suit or pr oceeding, at any stage it appears to the Court that there is a reasonable 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Court may adjourn the proceeding for such period as it 
thinks fit to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.  
(3) The power conferred by sub -rule ( 2) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other 
power of the Court to adjourn the proceedings.  
4. Assistance of welfare expert. —In every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, it shall be 
open to th e Court to secure the services of such person (preferably a woman where available), whether 
related to the parties or not, including a person professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the 
family as the Court may think fit, for the purpose of assis ting the Court in discharging the functions 
imposed by rule 3 of this Order.  
5. Duty to enquire into facts. —In every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, it shall be the 
duty of the Court to inquire, so far it reasonably can, into the facts alle ged by the plaintiff and into any 
facts alleged by the defendant.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 79, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 80, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  196 
 6. “Family ”—meaning of. —For the purposes of this Order, each of the following shall be treated 
as constituting a family, namely: — 
(a) (i) a man and his wife living together,  
(ii) any child o r children, being issue of theirs; or of such man or such wife,  
(iii) any child or children being maintained by such man and wife;  
(b) a man not having a wife or not living together with his wife, any child or children, being issue 
of his , and any child or  children being ma intained by him;  
(c) a women not having it husband or not living together with her husband, any child or children 
being issue of hers, and any child or children being maintained by her;  
(d) a man or woman and his or her brother , sister, a ncestor or lineal descendant living with him or 
her; and  
(e) any combination of one or more of the groups specified in clause ( a), clause ( b), clause ( c) or 
clause ( d) of this rule.  
Explanation. —For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the p rovisions of rule 6 shall be 
without any prejudice to the concept of “family ” in any personal law or in another law for the time being 
in force.]  
ORDER XXXIII  
1[Suits by indigent persons ] 
1. Suits may be instituted by indigent persons. —Subject  to the follo wing provisions, any suit may 
be instituted by an 2[indigent person].  
3[Explanation  1.—A person is an indigent person, — 
(a) If he is not possessed of sufficient means (other than property exempt from attachment in 
execution of a decree and the subject -matter of the suit) to enable him to pay the fee prescribed by 
law for the plaint in such suit, or  
(b) where no such fee is prescribed, if he is not entitled to property worth one thousand rupees 
other than the property exempt from attachment in execution of a  decree, and the subject -matter of the 
suit. 
Explanation II. —Any property which is acquired by a person after the presentation of his application 
for permission to sue as an indigent person, and before the decision of the application, shall be taken into 
account in considering the question whether or not the applicant is an indigent person.  
Explanation III —Where  the plaintiff sues in a representative capacity, the question whether he is an 
indigent person shall be determined with reference to the means poss essed by him in such capacity. ]  
4[1A. Inquiry into the means of an indigent person. —Every  inquiry into the question whether or 
not a person is an indigent person shall be made, in the first instance, by the chief ministerial officer of 
the Court , unless t he Court otherwise directs, and the Court may adopt the report of such officer as its 
own finding or may itself make an inquiry into the question.]  
2. Contents of application. —Every application for permission to sue as an 5[indigent person] shall 
contain t he particulars required in regard to plaints in suits: a schedule of any movable or immovable property  
belonging to the applicant, with the estimated value thereof, shall be annexed thereto ; and it shall be 
signed and ver ified in the manner prescribed for the signing and verification of pleadings.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 81, for “Suits by Paupers”( w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 81. ibid. for “pauper” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for the Explanation (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 81 (w.e. f. 1-2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 81, ibid.,  for “pauper” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
 197 
 3. Presentation of application. —Notwithstanding  anything contained in these rules , the application shall 
be presented to the Court by the applicant in person, unless he is exempted from appearing in Court , in whic h 
case the application may be presented by an authorised agent who can answer all material questions relating to 
the application, and who may be examined in the same manner as the party represented by him might have 
been examined had such party attended in  person:  
1[Provided that, where there are more plaintiffs than one , it shall be sufficient if the application is 
presented by one of the plaintiffs.]  
4. Examination of applicant .—(1) Where the application is in proper form and duly presented , the 
Court may , if it thinks fit, examine the applicant, or his agent when the applicant is allowed to appear by 
agent regarding the merits of the claim and the property of the applicant.  
(2) If presented by agent, Court may order applicant to be examined by commission. —Where  
the application is presented by an agent, the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that the applicant be 
examined by a commission in the manner in which the examination of an absent witness may be taken.  
5. Rejection of application. —The Court shall re ject an application for permission to use as 2[an 
indigent person] —  
(a) where it is not framed and presented in the manner prescribed by rules 2 and 3, or  
(b) where the applicant is not 2[an indigent person], or  
(c) where he has, within two months next be fore the presentation of the application, disposed of any 
property fraudulently or in order to be able to apply for permission to use as 2[an indigent person]:  
1[Provided that no application shall be rejected if, even after the value of the property dispos ed of by 
the applicant is taken into account, the applicant would be entitled to sue as an indigent person. ] or 
(d) where his allegations do not show a cause of action, or  
(e) where he has entered into any agreement with reference to the subject -matter of the proposed 
suit under which any other person has obtained an interest in such subject -matter;  1[or] 
1[(f) where the allegations, made by the applicant in the application show that the suit would be 
barred by any law for the time being in force, or  
(g) where any other person has entered into an agreement with him to finance the litigation.]  
. 
6. Notice of day for receiving evidence of applicant’s indigency. —Where the Court sees no reason 
to reject the application on any of the grounds stated in rule 5, it shall fix a day (of which at least ten day's 
clear notice shall be given to the opposite party and the Government pleader) for receiving such evidence 
as the applicant may adduce in proof of his indigency, and for hearing any evidence which may be 
adduced in disproof thereof.  
17. Procedure at hearing. —(1) On the day so fixed or as soon thereafter as may be convenient the 
Court shall examine the witnesses (if any) produced by either party, and may examine the applicant or his 
agent, and shall may 2[a full re cord of their evidence].  
3[(1A) The examination of the witnesses under sub -rule ( 1) shall be confined to the matters specified 
in clause (b), clause (c) and clause (e) of rule 5 but the examination of the applicant or his agent may 
relate to any of the mat ters specified in rule 5.]  
 (2) The Court shall also hear any argument which the parties may desire to offer on the question 
whether, on the face of the application and of the evidence (if any) taken by the Court 4[under rule 6 or 
under this rule], the app licant is or is not subject to any of the prohibitions specified in rule 5.  
                                                      
1. The provisions of this rule so far as it relates to the making of a memorandum are not applicable to the Chief Court of Ou dh, see Oudh 
Courts Act, 1925 (U.P. Act 4 of 1925), s. 16 (2). 
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 81, for “a memorandum of the substance of their evidence” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3.  Ins. by s. 81, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for “as herein provided” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  198 
 (3) The Court shall then either allow or refuse to allow the applicant to sue as 1[an indigent person].  
8. Procedure if application admitted. —Where  the application is granted, it s hall be numbered and 
registered, and shall be deemed the plaint in the suit, and the suit shall proceed in all other respects as a 
suit instituted in the ordinary manner, except that the plaintiff shall not be liable to pay any court -fee 2[or 
fees payable for service of process] in respect of any petition, appointment of a pleader or other 
proceeding connected with the suit.  
9. Withdrawal of permission to sue as an indigent person. —The Court may, on the application of the 
defendant, or of the Government ple ader, of which seven days, clear notice in writing has been given to the 
plaintiff, order that the permission granted to the plaintiff to sue as an indigent person be withdrawn — 
(a) if he is guilty of vexatious or improper conduct in the course of the suit ; 
(b) if it appears that his means are such that he ought not to continue to sue as 5[an indigent 
person]; or  
(c) if he has entered into any agreement with reference to the subject -matter of the suit under 
which any other person has obtained an interest in  such subject -matter.  
 3[9A. Court to assign a pleader to an unrepresented indigent person. —(1) Where a person, who is 
permitted to sue as an indigent person, is not represented by a pleader, the Court-may, if the circumstances 
of the case so require, assi gn a pleader to him.  
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules providing for — 
(a) the mode of selecting pleaders to be assigned under sub -rule (1); 
(b) the facilities to be provided to such pleaders by the Court  ; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may be provided by the rules for giving effect to 
the provisions of sub -rule ( 1).] 
10. Costs where indigent person succeeds. —Where the plaintiff succeeds in the suit, the Court shall 
calculate the amount o f court -fees which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted 
to sue as 5[an indigent person]; such amount shall be recoverable by the 3[State Government] from any 
party ordered by the decree to pay the same and shall be a first cha rge, on the subject -matter of the suit.  
11. Procedure where indigent person fails. —Where  the plaintiff fails in the suit or the permission 
granted to him to sue as an indigent person has been withdrawn, or where the suit is withdrawn or dismisses, — 
(a) bec ause the summons for the defendant to appear and answer has not been served upon him in 
consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court -fee or postal charges (if any) cha rgeable for 
such service 4[or to present copies of the plaint or concise statement], or  
(b) because the plaintiff does not appear when the suit is called on for hearing,  
the Court shall order the plaintiff, or any person added as a co -plaintiff to the suit, to pay the court -fees 
which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he  had not been permitted to sue as 5[an indigent person].  
6[11A. Procedure where indigent person ’s suit abates. —Where the suit abates by reason of the 
death of the plaintiff or of any person added as a co -plaintiff, the Court shall order that the amount of 
court -fees which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as 2[an indigent 
person] shall be recoverable by the State Government from the estate of the deceased plaintiff.] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for “pauper” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for  “other then fees pay able for service of process” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Provincial Government” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Government”.  
4. Ins. by Ac t 104 of 1976, s. 81 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for “pauper” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Ins. by Act 24 of 1942, s. 2.  199 
 12. State Government may apply for payment of court -fees.— The 1[State Government] shall have 
the right at any time to apply to the Court to make an order for the payment of court -fees under rule 10, 
rule 11 or 2[rule 11A].  
13. State Government to be deemed a party. —All matters arising between the 4[State Government] 
and any party to the suit under rule 10, rule 11,  5[rule 11A] or rule 12 shall be deemed to be questions 
arising between the parties to the suit within the meaning of section 47.  
3[14. Recovery of amount of court -fees.—Where an order is made un der rule 10, rule 11 or rule 
11A, the court shall forthwith cause a copy of the decree or order to be forwarded to the Collector who 
may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, recover the amount of court -fees specified therein 
from the person or  property liable for the payment as if it were an arrear or land reven ue.] 
15. Refusal to allow applicant to sue as an indigent person to bar subsequent application  of like 
nature. —An order refusing to allow the applicant to sue as 2[an indigent person] sh all be a bar to any 
subsequent application of the like nature by him in respect of the sa me right to sue; but the applicant shall 
be at liberty to institute a suit in the ordinary manner in respect of such right; 4[provided that the plaint 
shall be rejecte d if he does not pay, either at the time of the institution of the suit or within such time 
thereafter as the  Court may allow,] the costs (if any) incurred by the 4[State Government] and by the 
opposite party in opposing his application for leave to sue as  2[an indigent person].  
1[15A. Grant of time for payment of court -fee.—Nothing contained in rule 5, rule 7 or rule 15 shall 
prevent a Court, while rejecting an application under rule 5 or refusing an application under rule 7, from 
granting time to the appl icant to pay the requisite court -fee within such time as may be fixed by the Court 
or extended by it from time to time; and upon such payment and on payment of the costs referred to in 
5*** rule 15 within that time, the suit shall be deemed to have been in stituted on the date on which the 
application for permission to sue as an indigent person was presented.]  
 
16. Costs. —The costs of an application for permission to sue as an 6[indigent person] and of an 
inquiry into indigency shall be costs in the suit.  
7[17. Defence by an indigent person. —Any defendant, who desire to plead a set -off or counter -
claim, may be allowed to set up such claim as an indigent person, and the rules contained in this Order 
shall so far as may be, apply to him as if he were a plaintif f and his written statement were a plaint. 
18. Power of Government to provide for free legal services to indigent persons .—(1) Subject to 
the provisions of this Order, the Central or State Government may make such supplementary provisions 
as it thinks fit for providing free legal services to those who have been permitted to sue as indigent 
persons.  
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules for 
carrying out the supplementary provisions made by the Central or State  Government for providing free 
legal services to indigent persons referred to in sub -rule ( 1), and such rules may include the nature and 
extent of such legal services, the conditions under which they may be made available, the matters in 
respect of which, and the agencies through which, such services may be rendered.]  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Provincial Government” which had been subs. by the A.O.1937, for 
“Government”.  
2. Subs. by Ac t 24 of 1942, s. 2, for “or rule 11”.  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the rule 14.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 81, for “ provided that he first pays”  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Omitted by Act 19 of 1988 , s. 3 and the Second Sch edule . 
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 197 6, s. 81 , for “pauper ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7.  Ins. by s. 81, ibid. (w.e.f. .1 -2-1977).  200 
 ORDER XXXIV  
Suits relating to mortgages of immovable property  
1. Parties to suits for foreclosure sale and redemption. —Subject to the provisions of this Code, all 
persons having an interest either in the mortgage -security or in the right of redemption shall be joined as 
parties to any suit relating to the mortgage.  
Explanation. —A puisne mortgagee may sue for foreclosure or for sale without making the prior 
mortgagee a party to the suit; and a  prior mortgagee need not be joined in a suit to redeem a subsequent 
mortgage.  
1[2. Preliminary decree in foreclosure suit. —(1) In a suit for foreclosure, if the plaintiff succeeds, 
the Court shall pass a preliminary decree —  
(a) ordering that an account b e taken of what was due to the plaintiff at the date of such decree 
for—  
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage,  
(ii) the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him, and  
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by him up to that date in re spect of 
his mortgage -security, together with interest thereon; or  
(b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and  
(c) directing — 
(i) that, if the defendant pays into Court the amount so found or declared due on or before 
such date as the Court may fix w ithin six months from the date on which the Court confirms and  
countersigns the account taken under clause ( a), or from the date on which such amount is 
declared in Court under clause ( b), as the case may be, and thereafter pays such amount as may be 
adjud ged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges and expenses as provided in rule 10, 
together with subsequent interest on such sums respectively as provided in rule 11,  the plaintiff 
shall deliver up to the defendant, or to such person as the defendant app oints, all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property, and shall, if so required, re -transfer the 
property to the defendant at his cost free from the mortgage and from all incumbrances created by 
the plaintiff or any person cla iming under him, or, where the plaintiff claims by derived title, by 
those under whom he claims, and shall also, if necessary, put the defendant in possession of the 
property; and  
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due under or by the pr eliminary decree is not 
made on or before the date so fixed, or the defendant fails to pay, within such time as the Court                  
may fix, the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest, 
the plaintiff shall b e entitled to apply for a final decree debarring the defendant from all right to 
redeem the property.  
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court , from time to time , 
at any time before a final decree is passed,  extend th e time fixed for the payment of the amount found or 
declared due under sub -rule ( 1) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, 
expenses and interest.  
(3) Where , in a suit for foreclosure, subsequent mortgagees or persons derivin g title from, or 
subrogated to the rights of , any such mortgagees are joined as parties, the preliminary decree shall 
provide for the adjudication of the respective rights and liabilities of the parties to the suit in the manner 
and form set forth in Form No. 9 or Form No. 10, as the case may be, of Appendix D with such variations 
as the circumstances of the case may require.  
3. Final decree in foreclosure suit. —(1) Where, before a final decree debarring the defendant from 
all right to redeem the mortgaged property has been passed, the defendant makes payment into Court of 
all amounts due from him under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 2, the Court shall, on application made by the 
defendant in this behalf, pass a final decree — 
                                                      
1. Subs by Act 21 of 1929, s. 4, for the rules 2 to 8.  
 201 
 (a) ordering the plaintiff to deliver up t he documents referred to in the preliminary decree, and , if 
necessary, — 
(b) ordering him to re -transfer at the cost or the defendant the mortgaged property as directed  in 
the said decree,  and also, if necessary ,— 
(c) ordering him to put the defendant in po ssession of the property.  
(2) Where payment in accordance with sub -rule ( 1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application 
made by the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree declaring that the defendant and all persons 
claiming through or under him or debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged property and also, if 
necessary, ordering the defendant to put the plaintiff in possession of the property.  
(3) On the passing of a final decree under sub -rule ( 2), all liabilities to which the defenda nt is subject 
in respect of the mortgage or on account of the suit shall be deemed to have been discharged.  
4. Preliminary decree  in suit for sale. —(1) In a suit for sale , if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court shall 
pass a preliminary decree to the effect m entioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) (i) of sub -rule (1) of rule 2, and 
further directing that, in default of the defendant paying as therein mentioned, the plaintiff shall be entitled 
to apply for a final decree directing that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the 
proceeds of the sale (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and applied in 
payment of what has been found or declared under or by the preliminary decree due to the plaintiff, toge ther 
with such amount as may have been adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and 
interest, and the balance, if any, be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to receive the same.  
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from time to time , 
at any time before a final decree for sale is passed, extend the time fixed for the payment of the amount 
found or declared due under sub -rule ( 1) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequen t costs , 
charges, expenses and interest.  
(3) Power to decree sale in foreclosure -suit.—In a suit for foreclosure in the case of an anomalous 
mortgage, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court may, at the instance of any party to the suit or of any other 
person  interested in the mortgage -security or the right of redemption , pass a like decree (in lieu of a 
decree for foreclosure) on such terms as it thinks fit, including the deposit in Court of a reasonable sum 
fixed by the Court to meet the expenses of the sale  and to secure the performance of the terms.  
(4) Where , in a suit for sale or a suit foreclosure in which sale is ordered , subsequent mortgages or 
persons deriving title from, or subrogated to the rights of , any such mortgagees are joined as parties , the 
preliminary decree referred to in sub -rule ( 1) shall provide for the adjudication of the respective rights and 
liabilities of the parties to the suit in the manner and form set forth in Form No. 9, Form No. 10 or Form No. 
11 as the case may be , of Appendix D with such variations as the circumstances of the case may require.  
5. Final decree in suit for sale. —(1) Where, on or before the day fixed or at any time before the 
confirmation of a sale made in pursuance of a final decree passed under sub -rule ( 3) of this rule, the 
defendant makes payment into Court of all amounts due from him under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 4, the Court 
shall, on application made by the defendant in this behalf, pass a final decree or, if such decree has been 
passed, an order —  
(a) ordering  the plaintiff to deliver up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree, and, if 
necessary, — 
(b) ordering him to transfer the mortgaged property as directed in the said decree, and, also, if 
necessary, — 
(c) ordering him to put the defendant in pos session of the property.  
(2) Where the mortgaged property or part thereof has been sold in pursuance of a decree passed under 
sub-rule ( 3) of this rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub -rule ( 1) of this rule , unless the 
defendant , in addition to  the amount mentioned in sub -rule ( 1), deposits in Court for payment to the 
purchaser a sum equal to five per cent. of the amount of the purchase -money paid into Court by the 
purchaser.  202 
 Where such deposit has been made, the purchaser shall be entitled to a n order for repayment of the 
amount of the purchase -money paid into Court by him, together with a sum equal to five per cent. thereof.  
(3) Where payment in accordance with sub -rule ( 1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application 
made by the plaintif f in this behalf, pass a final decree directing that the mortgaged property or a 
sufficient part thereof be sold, and that the proceeds of the sale be dealt with in the manner provided in 
sub-rule ( 1) of rule 4.  
6. Recovery of balance due on mortgage in su it for sale. —Where  the net proceeds of any sale held 
under 1[rule 5] are found insufficient to pay the amount due to the plaintiff, the Court, on application by 
him may, if the balance is legally recoverable from the defendant otherwise than out of the pro perty sold, 
pass a decree for such balance.  
7. Preliminary decree in redemption suit. —(1) In a suit for redemption , if the plaintiff succeeds , 
the Court shall pass a preliminary decree —  
(a) ordering that an account be taken of what was due to the defendan t at the date of such decree 
for—  
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage,  
(ii) the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him, and  
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by him up to that date , in respect of 
mortgage -security, together w ith interest thereon; or  
(b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and  
(c) directing —  
(i) that, if the plaintiff pays into Court the amount so found or declared due on or before such 
date as the Court may fix within six months from the date on which t he Court confirms and 
countersigns the account taken under clause ( a), or from the date on which such amount is 
declared in Court under clause ( b), as the case may be, and thereafter pays such amount as may be 
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, c harges and expenses as provided in rule 10 , 
together with subsequent interest on such sums respectively as provided in rule 11, the defendant 
shall deliver up to the plaintiff, or to such person as the plaintiff appoints, all documents in his 
possession or  power relating to the mortgaged property , and shall, if so required, retransfer the 
property to the plaintiff at his cost free from the mortgage and from all encumbrances created by 
the defendant or any person claiming under him where the defendant claims  by derived title, by 
those under whom the claims, and shall also , if necessary put the plaintiff in possession of the 
property; and  
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due under or by the preliminary decree is 
not made on or before the d ate so fixed, or the plaintiff fails to pay, within such time as the Court 
may fix, the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest, 
the defendant shall be entitled to apply for a final decree — 
(a) in the case of a mo rtgage other than a usufructuary mortgage, a mortgage by 
conditional sale, or an anomalous mortgage the terms of which provide for foreclosure only 
and not for sale, that the mortgage property, be sold, or  
(b) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or such an anomalous mortgage as 
aforesaid, that the plaintiff be debarred from all right to redeem the property.  
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from time to time, 
at any time before the passing of a final d ecree for foreclosure or sale, as the case may be, extend the time 
fixed for the payment of the amount found or declared due under sub -rule ( 1) or of the amount adjudged 
due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest.  
8. Final decree in  redemption  suit.—(1) Where, before a final decree debarring the plaintiff from 
all right to redeem the mortgaged property has been passed or before the confirmation of a sale held in 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 82, for “the last preceding rule” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  203 
 pursuance of a final decree passed under sub -rule ( 3) of this rule, the plaintiff makes payment into 
Court of all amounts due from  him under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 7, the Court shall, on application made by 
the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree or, if such decree has been passed, an order — 
(a) ordering the defendant to delivery up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree,  
and, if necessary ,— 
(b) ordering him to re -transfer at the cost of the plaintiff the mortgaged property as directed in the 
said decree , 
and, also, if necessary, — 
(c) ordering him to put t he plaintiff in possession of the property.  
(2) Where the mortgaged property or a part thereof has been sold in pursuance of a decree passed 
under sub -rule ( 3) of this rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub -rule ( 1) of this rule, unless the 
plaintiff, in addition to the amount mentioned in sub -rule ( 1), deposits in Court for payment to the 
purchaser a sum equal to five per cent. of the amount of the p urchase -money paid into Court by the 
purchaser.  
Where such deposit has been made, the purchaser s hall be entitled to an order for repayment of the 
amount of the purchase -money paid into Court by him, together with a sum equal to five per cent. thereof.  
(3) Where pay ment in accordance with sub -rule ( 1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application  
made by the defendant in this behalf, —  
(a) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or of such an anomalous mortgage as is 
hereinbefore  referred to in rule 7, pass a final decree declaring that the plaintiff and all persons 
claiming under him are de barred from all right to redeem  the mortgaged property and,  also, if 
necessary, ordering the plaintiff to put the defendant in possession of the mort gaged property; or  
(b) in the case of any other mortgage, not being a  usufructuary mortgage, pass final de cree that 
the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the proceeds of the sale (after 
deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and applied in payment of 
what is found due to the defendant, and the balance, if  any, be paid to the plaintiff or other persons 
entitled to receive the same. ] 
1[8A. Recovery of balance due on mortgage in suit for redemption. —Where  the net proceeds of 
any sale held under 2[rule 8] ar e found insu fficient to pay the amount due to the def endant , the Court, 3[on 
application by him in execution], may, if the balance is legally recoverable from the plaintiff otherwise 
than out of the property sold, pass a decree for such balance.]  
9. Decree where nothing is found due or where mortgagee has be en overpaid. —Notwithstanding 
anything hereinbefore contained, if it appears, upon taking the account referred to in rule 7, that nothing is 
due to the defendant or that he has been overpaid, the Court shall pass a decree directing the defendant, if so 
require, to re -transfer the property and to pay to the plaintiff the amount which may be found due to him; 
and the plaintiff shall, if necessary, be put in possession of the mortgaged property.  
4[10. Costs of mortgagee subsequent to decree. —In finally adjustin g the amount to be paid to a 
mortgagee in case of a foreclosure, sale or redemption, the Court shall, unless in the case of costs of the 
suit the conduct of the mortgagee has been such as to disentitle him thereto, add to the mortgage -money 
such costs of t he suit and other costs, charges and expenses as have been properly incurred by him since 
the date of the preliminary decree for foreclosure, sale or redemption up to the time of actual payment: ] 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1929, s . 5. 
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 82, for “the last preceding rule” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 82,  ibid., for “an application by him” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 6, for rules 10 and 11.  204 
 1[Provided that where the mortgagor, before or at the time o f the institution of the suit, tenders or 
deposits the amount due on the mortgage, or such amount as is not subsequently deficient in the opinion 
of the Court, he shall not be ordered to pay the costs of the suit to the mortgagee and the mortgagor shall 
be entitled to recover his own costs of the suit from the mortgagee, unless the Court, for reasons to be 
recorded, otherwise directs.] 
2[10A. Power of Court to direct mortgagee to pay mesne profits. —Where in a suit for foreclosure, the 
mortgagor has, before or at the time of the institution of the suit, tendered or deposited the sum due on the 
mortgage, or such sum as is not substantially deficient in the opinion of the Court, the Court shall direct the 
mortgagee to pay to the mortgagor mesne  profits for the period beginning with the institution of the suit]. 
11. Payment of interest. —In any decree passed in a suit for foreclosure , sale or redemption, where 
interest is legally recoverable, the Court may order payment of interest to the mortgagee as follows, namely: — 
(a) interest up to the date on or before which payment of the amount found or declared due is 
under the preliminary decree to be made by the mortgagor or other person redeeming the mortgage — 
(i) on the principal amount found or declared due on the mortga ge,—at the rate payable on 
the principal, or, where no such rate is fixed, at such rate as the Court deems reasonable,  
2*   *   *   *  *and 
(iii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee for costs, charges and expenses properly 
incurred by the mortgagee  in respect of the mortgage -security up to the date of the preliminary 
decree and added to the mortgage -money, —at the rate agreed between the parties or, failing such 
rate, 3[at such rate not exceeding six per cent. per annum as the Court deems reasonable] ; and  
4[(b) subsequent interest up to the date of realisation or actual payment on the aggregate of the 
principal sums specified in clause ( a) as calculated in accordance with that clause at  such rate as the 
Court deems reasonable.]  
12. S ale of property su bject to prior mortgage. —Where  any property the sale of which is directed 
under this Order is subject to a prior mortgage,  the Court may, with the consent of the prior mortgagee, 
direct that the property- be sold free from the same, giving to such prior mo rtgagee the same interest in the 
proceeds of the sale as he had in the property sold.  
13. Application of proceeds. —(1) Such proceeds shall be brought into Court and applied as 
follows: — 
first, in payment of all expenses incident to the sale or properly inc urred in any attempted 
sale;  
secondly, in payment of whatever is due to the prior mortgagee on account of the prior mortgage, 
and of costs, properly incurred in connection therewith;  
thirdly, in payment in all interest due on account of the mortgage in con sequence whereof the sale 
was directed, and of the costs of the suit in which the decree directing the sale was made;  
fourthly, in payment of the principal money due on account of that mortgage; and  
lastly, the residue (if any) shall be paid to the person proving himself to be interested in the 
property sold, or if there are more such persons than one, than two, to such persons according to their 
respective interests therein or upon their joint receipt.  
(2) Nothing in this rule or in rule 12 shall be deemed  to affect the powers conferred by section 57 of 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882).  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 82 (w.e .f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Sub-clause ( ii) omitted by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 14,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for cl ause  (b) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
 205 
 14. Suit for sale necessary for bringing mortgaged property to sale .—(1) Where a mortgage has 
obtained a decree for the payment of money in satisfaction of a c laim arising under the mortgage, he shall 
not be entitled to bring the mortgaged property to sale otherwise than by instituting a suit for sale in 
enforcement of the mortgage, and he may institute such suit notwithstanding anything contained in               
Order II, rule 2.  
(2) Nothing in sub -rule ( 1) shall apply to any territories to which the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 
(4 of 1882), has not been extended.  
1[15. Mortgages by the deposit of title deeds and charges. —2[(1)] All the provisions contained i n 
this Order which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to a mortgage by deposit of 
title-deeds within the meaning of section 58, and to a charge within the meaning of section 100 of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882);  
3[(2) Where a decree orders payment of money and charges it on immovable property on default of 
payment, the  amount may be realised by sale of that property in execution of that decree.] 
ORDER XXXV  
INTERPLEADER  
1. Plaint in interpleader -suit.—In every suit of interpleader the plaint shall, in addition to the other 
statements necessary for plaints, state —  
(a) that the plaintiff claims no interest in the subject -matter in dispute other than for 
charges or costs ; 
(b) the claims made by the defendants severally; a nd 
(c) that there is no collusion between the plaintiff and any of the defendants.  
2. Payment of thing claimed into Court. —Where  the thing claimed is capable of being paid into 
Court or placed in the custody of the Court, the plaintiff may be required to s o pay or place it before he 
can be entitled to any order in the suit.  
3. Procedure where defendant is suing plaintiff. —Where any of the defendants in an 
interpleader -suit is actually suing the plaintiff in respect the subject -matter of such suit, the Court  in 
which the suit against the plaintiff is pending shall, on being informed by the Court in which the 
interpleader -suit has been instituted, stay the proceedings as against him ; and his costs in the suit so 
stayed may be provided for in such suit; but if , and in so far as, they are not provided for in that suit, 
they may be added to his costs incurred in the interpleader -suit.  
4. Procedure at first hearing. —(1) At the first hearing the Court may — 
(a) declare that the plaintiff is discharged from all liabil ity to the defendants in respect of the 
thing claimed, award him his costs, and dismiss him from the suit; or  
(b) if it thinks that justice or convenience so require, retain all parties until the final disposal of 
the suit.  
(2) Where the Court finds that t he admission of the parties or other evidence enable it to do so, it may 
adjudicate the title to the thing claimed.  
(3) Where the admissions of the parties do not enable the Court so to adjudicate, it may direct —  
(a) that an issue or issues between the pa rties be framed and tried, and  
(b) that any claimant be made a plaintiff in lieu of or in addition to the original plaintiff,  
and shall proceed to try the suit in the ordinary, manner.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 7, for rule 15.  
2. Rule 15 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 82 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 82, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
 206 
 5. Agents and tenants may not institute interpleader suits. —Nothing in this Order shall be deemed 
to enable agents to sue their principals, or tenants to sue their landlords, for the purpose of compelling 
them to interplead with any persons other than persons making claim through such principals or landlords.  
Illustrations  
(a) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. C alleges that the jewels were wrongfully obtained 
from him by A, and claims them from B. B cannot institute an interpleader -suit against A and C.  
(b) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. He then  writes to C for the purpose of making the 
jewels a security for a debt due from himself to C. A afterwards alleges that C’s debt is satisfied, and        
C alleges the contrary. Both claim the jewels from B. B may institute in interpleader -suit against A and C.  
6. Charge for plaintiff’s costs. —Where the suit is properly instituted the Court may provide for the 
costs of the original plaintiff by giving him a charge on the thing claimed or in some other effectual way.  
ORDER XXXVI  
SPECIAL CASE  
1. Power to st ate case for Court’s opinion. —(1) Parties claiming to be interested in the decision of 
any question of fact or law may enter into an agreement in writing stating such question in the form of a 
case for the opinion of the Court, and providing that, upon the  finding of the Court with respect to such 
question, —  
(a) a sum of money fixed by the parties or to be determined by the Court shall be paid by one of 
the parties to the other of them; or  
(b) some property, movable or immovable, specified in the agreement , shall be delivered by one 
of the parties to the other of them; or  
(c) one or more of the parties shall do, or refrain from doing, some other particular act specified 
in the agreement.  
(2) Every case stated under this rule shall be divided into consecutiv ely numbered paragraphs, and 
shall concisely state such facts and specify such documents as may be necessary to enable the Court to 
decide the question raised thereby.  
2. Where value of subject -matter must be stated. —Where the agreement is for the delivery  of any 
property, or for the doing, or the refraining from doing, any particular act, the estimated value of the 
property to be delivered, or to which the act specified has reference, shall be stated in the agreement.  
3. Agreement to be filed and registere d as suit. —(1) The agreement, if framed in accordance with 
the rules hereinbefore contained, may be filed 1[with an application] in the Court which would have 
jurisdiction to entertain a suit, the amount or value of the subject -matter of which is the same as the 
amount or value of the subject -matter of the agreement.  
(2) 2[The application] when so filed, shall be numbered and registered as a suit between one or more 
of the parties claiming to be interested as plaintiff or plaintiffs, and the other or the ot hers of them as 
defendant or defendants; and notice shall be given to all the parties to the agreement, other than the party 
or parties by whom 3[the application was presented.]  
4. Parties to be subject to Court’s jurisdiction. —Where the agreement has been  filed, the parties to 
it shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Court and shall be bound by the statements contained therein.  
5. Hearing and disposal of case. —(1) The case shall be set down for hearing as a suit instituted in the 
ordinary manner, and  the provisions of this Code shall apply to such suit so far as the same are applicable.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 83 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 83, ibid., for “The agreement ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. b y s. 83, ibid., for “it was presented ” (w.e.f. 1 -2.1977).  207 
 (2) Where the Court is satisfied, after examination of the parties, or after taking such evidence as it 
thinks fit —  
(a) that the agreement was duly executed by them,  
(b) that they have a bona fide interest in question stated therein, and  
(c) that the same is fit to be decided , 
it shall proceed to pronounce judgment thereon, in the same way as in an ordinary suit, and upon the 
judgment so pronounced a decree shall follo w. 
1[6. No appeal from a decree passed under rule 5. —No appeal shall lie from a decree passed under 
rule 5.]  
ORDER XXXVII  
SUMMARY PROCEDURE  2*** 
3[1. Courts and classes of suits to which the Order is to apply. —(1) This Order shall apply to the 
following C ourts, namely: —  
(a) High Courts, City Civil Courts and Courts of Small Causes; and  
(b) other Courts:  
Provided that in respect of the Courts referred to in clause ( b), the High Court may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, restrict the operation of t his Order only to such categories of suits as it deems proper, 
and may also, from time to time, as the circumstances of the case may require, by subsequent notification 
in the Official Gazette, further restrict, enlarge or vary, the categories of suits to be brought under the 
operation of this Order as it deems proper.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -rule ( 1), the Order applies to the following classes of suits , 
namely: —  
(a) suits upon bills of exchange, hundies and promissory notes ; 
(b) suits in whi ch the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money 
payable by the defendant, with or without interest, arising, —  
(i)  on a written contract, or  
(ii)  on an enactment, where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or  in the 
nature of a debt other than a penalty; or  
(iii) on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or liquidated 
demand only.]  
4[2. Institution of summary suits. —(1) A suit, to which this Order applies, may if the plainti ff 
desires to proceed hereunder, be instituted by presenting a plaint which shall contain, —  
(a) a specific averment to the effect that the suit is filed under this Order;  
(b) that no relief, which does not fall within the ambit of this rule, has been clai med in the plaint; 
and 
(c) the following inscription, immediately below the number of the suit in the title of the suit, 
namely : —  
“(Under Order XXXVII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908).”  
(2) The summons of the suit shall be in Form No. 4 in Appendix B or in such other Form as may, 
from time to time, be prescribed.  
(3) The defendant shall not defend the suit referred to in sub -rule ( 1) unless he enters an appearance 
and in default of his entering an appearance the allegations in the plaint shall be dee med to be admitted 
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 83 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. The words “On Negotiable Instruments ” omitted by s. 84, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 84, ibid., for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act  104 of 1976, s. 84, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  208 
 and the plaintiff shall be entitled to a decree for any sum, not exceeding the sum mentioned in the 
summons, together with interest at the rate specified, if any, up to the date of the decree and such sum for 
costs as may be determined b y the High Court from time to time by rules made in that behalf and such 
decree may be executed forthwith.]  
1[3. Procedure for the appearance of d efendant —(1) In a suit to which this Order applies, the plaintiff 
shall, together with the summons under rule 2, serve on the defendant a copy of the plaint and annexures 
thereto and the defendant may, at any time within ten days of such service, enter an appearance either in 
person or by pleader and, in either case, he shall file in Court an address for service o f notices on him. 
(2) Unless otherwise ordered, all summonses, notices and other judicial processes, required to be 
served on the defendant, shall be deemed to have been duly served on him if they are left at the address 
given by him for such service.  
(3) On the day of entering the appearance, notice of such appearance shall be given by the defendant 
to the plaintiff’s pleader, or, if the plaintiff sues in person, to the plaintiff himself, either by notice 
delivered at or sent by a pre -paid letter directed to the address of the plaintiff's pleader or of the plaintiff, 
as the case may be.  
(4) If the defendant enters an appearance, the plaintiff shall thereafter serve on the defendant a 
summons for judgment in Form No. 4A in Appendix B or such other Form as ma y be prescribed from 
time to time, returnable not less than ten days from the date of service supported by an affidavit verifying 
the cause of action and the amount claimed and stating that in his belief there is no defence to the suit.  
(5) The defendant m ay, at any time within ten days from the service of such summons for judgment, 
by affidavit or otherwise disclosing such facts as may be deemed sufficient to entitle him to defend, apply 
on such summons for leave to defend such suit, and leave to defend ma y be granted to him 
unconditionally or upon such terms as may appear to the Court or Judge to be just:  
Provided that leave to defend shall not be refused unless the Court is satisfied that the facts disclosed 
by the defendant do not indicate that he has a substantial defence to raise or that the defence intended to 
be put up by the defendant is frivolous or vexatious:  
Provided further that, where a part of the amount claimed by the plaintiff is admitted by the defendant 
to be due from him, leave to defend t he suit shall not be granted unless the amount so admitted to be due 
is deposited by the defendant in Court.  
(6) At the hearing of such summons for judgment, — 
(a) if the defendant has not applied for leave to defend, or if such application has been made an d 
is refused, the plaintiff shall be entitled to judgment forthwith; or  
(b) if the defendant is permitted to defend as to the whole or any part of the claim, the Court or 
Judge may direct him to give such security and within such time as may be fixed by th e Court or Judge 
and that, on failure to give such security within the time specified by the Court or Judge or to carry out 
such other directions as may have been given by the Court or Judge, the plaintiff shall be entitled to 
judgment forthwith.  
(7) The C ourt or Judge may, for sufficient cause shown by the defendant, excuse the delay of the 
defendant in entering an appearance or in applying for leave to defend the suit.]  
4. Power to set aside decree. —After  decree the Court may, under special circumstances set aside 
the decree, and if necessary stay or set aside execution, and may give leave to the defendant to appear to 
the summons and to defend the suit, if it seems reasonable to the Court so to do, and on such terms as the 
Court thinks fit.  
5. Power to or der bill, etc., to be deposited with officer of Court. —In any proceeding under this 
Order the Court may order the bill, hundi or note on which the suit is founded to be forthwith deposited 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 84, ibid., for rule 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  209 
 with an officer of the Court, and may further order that all procee dings shall be stayed until the plaintiff 
gives security for the costs thereof.  
6. Recovery of cost of noting non -acceptance of dishonoured bill or note. —The holder of every 
dishonoured bill of exchange or promissiory note shall have the same remedies for the recovery of the 
expenses incurred in noting the same for non -acceptance or non -payment, or otherwise, by reason of 
such dishonour, as he has under this Order for the recovery of the amount of such bill or note.  
7. Procedure in suits. —Save as provided b y this Order, the procedure in suits hereunder shall be the 
same as the procedure in suits instituted in the ordinary manner.  
ORDER XXXVIII  
ARREST AND ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT  
Arrest before judgment  
1. Where defendant may be called upon to furnish securi ty for appearance. —Where  at any 
stage of a suit, other than a suit of the nature referred to in section 16, clauses (a) to (d), the Court is 
satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, —  
(a) that the defendant, with intent to delay the plaintiff, or to avoid any  process of the Court or to 
obstruct or delay the execution of any decree that may be passed against him, —  
(i) has absconded or left the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or  
(ii) is about to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdicti on of the Court, or  
(iii) has disposed of or removed from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court his 
property or any part thereof, or  
(b) that the defendant is about to leave 1[India] under circumstances affording reasonable 
probability that the  plaintiff will or may thereby be obstructed or delayed in the execution of any 
decree that may be passed against the defendant in the suit,  
the Court may issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause why 
he should no t furnish security for his appearance:  
Provided that the defendant shall not be arrested if he pays to the officer entrusted with the execution of 
the warrant any sum specified in the warrant as sufficient to satisfy the plaintiff's claim; and such sum sha ll 
be held in deposit by the Court until the suit is disposed of or until the further order of the Court.  
2. Security. —(1) Where the defendant fails to show such cause the Court shall order him either to 
deposit in Court money or other property sufficient to answer the claim against him, or to furnish security 
for his appearance at any time when called upon while the suit is pending and until satisfaction of any 
decree that may be passed against him in the suit, or make such order as it thinks fit in regard  to the sum 
which may have been paid by the defendant under the proviso to the last preceding rule. 
(2) Every surety for the appearance of a defendant shall bind himself, in default of such appearance, 
to pay any sum of money which the defendant may be ord ered to pay in the suit.  
3. Procedure on application by surety to be discharged. —(1) A surety for the appearance of a defendant 
may at any time apply to the Court in which he became such surety to be discharged from his obligation.  
(2) On such application being made, the Court shall summon the defendant to appear or, if it thinks 
fit, may issue a warrant for his arrest in the first instance.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3 , for “the States ”. 210 
  (3) On the appearance of the defendant in pursuance of the summons or warrant, or on his voluntary 
surrender, the Cou rt shall direct the surety to be discharged from his obligation, and shall call upon the 
defendant to find fresh security.  
4. Procedure where defendant fails to furnish security or find fresh security. —Where  the defendant 
fails to comply with any order und er rule 2 or rule 3, the Court may commit him to the civil prison until the 
decision of the suit or, where a decree is passed against the defendant, until the decree has been satisfied:  
Provided that no person shall be detained in prison under this rule in  any case for a longer period than 
six months, nor for a longer period than six weeks when the amount or value of the subject -matter of the 
suit does not exceed fifty rupees:  
Provided also that no person shall be detained in prison under this rule after he  has complied with 
such order.  
Attachment before judgment  
5. Where  defendant may be called upon to furnish security for production of                          
property. —(1) Where, at any stage of a suit, the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, t hat the 
defendant, with intent to obstruct or delay the execution of any decree that may be passed against him, —  
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or  
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the loc al limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court , 
the Court may direct the defendant, within a time to be fixed by it, either to furnish security, in such sum 
as may be specified in the order, to produce and place at the disposal of the Court, when required, the  said 
property or the value of the same, or such portion thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the decree, or to 
appear and show cause why he should not furnish security.  
(2) The plaintiff shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, specify the property r equired to be attached 
and the estimated value thereof.  
(3) The Court may also in the order direct the conditional attachment of the whole or any portion of 
the property so specified.  
1[(4) If an order of attachment is made without complying with the pro visions of sub -rule ( 1) of this 
rule, such attachment shall be void.]  
6. Attachment where cause not shown or security not furnished. —(1) Where the defendant fails 
to show cause why he should not furnish security, or fails to furnish the security required, within the time 
fixed by the Court , the Court may order that the property specified , or such portion thereof as appears 
sufficient to satisfy any decree which may be passed in the suit, be attached.  
(2) Where the defendant shows such cause or furnishes the  required security , and the property 
specified or any portion of it has been attached, the Court shall order the attachment to be withdrawn, or 
make such other order as it thinks fit.  
7. Mode of making attachment. —Save as otherwise expressly provided, the attachment shall be 
made in the manner provided for the attachment of property in execution of a decree . 
2[8. Adjudication of claim to property attached before judgment. —Where any claim is preferred to 
property attached before judgment, such claim shall be  adjudicated upon in the manner hereinbefore provided 
for the adjudication of claim to property attached in execution of a decree for the payment of money.]  
9. Removal of attachment when security furnished or suit dismissed. —Where an order is made 
for atta chment before judgment, the Court shall order the attachment to be withdrawn when the defendant 
furnishes the security required, together with security for the cost of the attachment, or when the suit is 
dismissed.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 85 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 85, for rule 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  211 
 10. Attachment before judgment not to aff ect rights of strangers, nor bar decree -holder from 
applying for sale. —Attachment before judgment shall not affect the rights, existing prior to the 
attachment, of persons not parties to the suit, nor bar any person holding a decree against the defendant 
from applying for the sale of the property under attachment in execution of such decree.  
11. Property attached before judgment not to be re -attached in execution of decree. —Where 
property is under attachment by virtue of the provisions of this order decree is subsequently passed in 
favour of the plaintiff, it shall not be necessary upon an application for execution of such decree to apply 
for a re -attachment of the property.  
1[11A. Provisions applicable to attachment. —(1) The provisions of this Code applicab le to an 
attachment made in execution of a decree shall, so f ar as may be, apply to an attachment made before 
judgment which continues after the judgment by virtue of the provisions of rule 11.  
(2) An attachment made before judgment in a suit which is dism issed for default shall not become 
revived merely by reason of the fact that the order for the dismissal of the suit for default has been set 
aside and the suit has been restored.]  
12. Agricultural produce not attachable before judgment. —Nothing in this Or der shall be deemed 
to authorise the plaintiff to apply for the attachment of any agricultural produce in the possession of an 
agriculturist, or to empower the Court to order the attachment or production of such produce.  
2[13. Small Cause Court no t to atta ch immovable property. —Nothing in this Order shall be 
deemed to empower any Court of Small Causes to make an order for the attachment of immovable 
property.]  
ORDER XXXIX  
TEMPORARY  INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY  ORDERS  
Temporary injunctions  
1. Cases in which  temporary injunction may be granted. —Where in any suit it is proved by 
affidavit or otherwise — 
(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or alienated by 
any party to the suit, or wrongfully sold in execution of a dec ree, or  
(b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose of his property with a view to 
3[defrauding] his creditors,  
4[(c) that the defendant threatens to dispossess, the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury to the 
plaintiff in relation to  any property in dispute in the suit,]  
the Court may by order grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act , or make such other order for the 
purpose of staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale, removal or disposition of the 
prope rty 5[or dispossession of the plaintiff, or otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in relation to any 
property in dispute in the suit] as the Court thinks fit, until the disposal of the suit or until further orders.  
2. Injunction to restrain repetition or continuance of breach. —(1) In any suit for restraining the 
defendant from committing a breach of contract or other injury of any kind, whether compensation is 
claimed in the suit or not, the plaintiff may, at any time after the commencement of the suit,  and either 
before or after judgment , apply to the Court for a temporary injunction to restrain the defendant from 
committing the breach of contract or injury complained, of, or any breach of contract or injury of a like 
kind arising out of the same contra ct or relating to the same property or right.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 85, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act  1 of 1926 , s. 4. 
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 86, for “defraud” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by s. 86, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 86 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977). 212 
 (2) The Court may by order grant such injunction, on such terms as to the duration of the injunction, 
keeping an account, giving security, or otherwise, as the Court thinks fit.  
1*   *   *   *    * 
1[2A. Conseq uence of disobedience or breach of injunction. —(1) In the case of disobedience of 
any injunction granted or other order made under rule 1 or rule 2 or breach of any of the terms on which 
the injunction was granted or the order made , the Court granting the injunction or making the order , or 
any Court to which the suit or proceeding is transferred, may order the property of the person guilty of 
such disobedience or breach to be attached , and may also order such person to be detained in the civil 
prison for a term not exceeding three months, unless in the meantime the Court directs his release.  
(2) No attachment made under this rule shall remain in force for more than one year, at the end of 
which time, if the disobedience or breach continues, the property atta ched may be sold and out of the 
proceeds, the Court may award such compensation as it thinks fit to the injured party and shall pay the 
balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.]  
3. Before granting injunction, Court to direct notice to opposite party .—The Court shall in all 
cases, except where it appears that the object of granting the injunction would be defeated by the delay, 
before granting an injunction, direct notice of the application for the same to be given to the opposite 
party:  
1[Provided th at, where it is proposed to grant an injunction without giving notice of the application to 
the opposite party, the Court shall record the reasons for its opinion that the object of granting the 
injunction would be defeated by delay , and require the applic ant—  
(a) to deliver to the opposite party, or to send to him by registered post, immediately after the 
order granting the injunction has been made, a copy of the application for injunction together with —  
(i) a copy of the affidavit filed in support of th e application ; 
(ii) a copy of the plaint; and  
(iii) copies of documents on which the applicant, relies, and  
(b) to file, on the day on which such injunction is granted or on the day immediately following 
that day, an  affida vit stating that the copies aforesaid have been so delivered or sent.]  
1[3A. Court to dispose of application for injunction within thirty days. —Where an injunction has 
been granted without giving notice to the opposite party, the Court shall make an endeav our to finally 
dispose of the application within thirty days from the date on which the injunction was granted; and 
where it is unable so to do, it shall record its reasons for such inability.]  
4. Order for injunction may be discharged, varied or set aside .—Any order for an injunction may 
be discharged, or varied, or set aside by the Court, on application made thereto by any party dissatisfied 
with such order:  
2[Provided that if in an application for temporary injunction or in any affidavit supporting such application, 
a party has knowingly made a false or misleading statement in relation to a material particular and the 
injunction was granted without giving notice to the opposite party, the Court shall vacate the injunction unless, 
for reasons to be recorde d, it considers that it is not necessary so to do in the interests of justice:  
Provided further that where an order for injunction has been passed after giving to a party an 
opportunity of being heard, the order shall not be discharged, varied or set aside  on the application of that 
party except where such discharge, variation or setting aside has been necessitated by a change in the 
circumstances, or unless the Court is satisfied that the order has caused undue hardship to that party.]  
                                                      
1. Sub -rules ( 3) and ( 4) omitted by s. 86 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 86 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  213 
 5. Injection to corp oration binding on its officer. —An injunction directed to a corporation is 
bindi ng not only on the corporation itself, but also on all members and officers of the corporation whose 
personal action it seeks to restrain.  
Interlocutory orders  
6. Power to orde r interim sale. —The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit, order the 
sale, by any person named in such order, and in such manner and on such terms as it thinks fit, of any 
movable property, being the subject -matter of such suit, or attached before judgment in such suit, which is 
subject to speedy and natural delay, or which for any other just and sufficient cause, it may be desirable to 
have sold at once.  
7. Detention, preservation, inspection, etc., of subject -matter of suit. —(1) The Court m ay, on the 
application of any party to a suit, and on such terms as it thinks fit, —  
(a) make an order for the detention, preservation or inspection of any property which is the 
subject -matter of such suit, or as to which any question may arise therein;  
(b) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any person to enter upon or into any land or 
building in the possession of any other party to such suit; and  
(c) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any samples to be taken, or any observa tion 
to be made or experiment to be tried, which may seem necessary or expendient for the purpose of 
obtaining full information or evidence.  
(2) The provisions as to execution of process shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to persons authorised to 
enter under t his rule.  
8. Application for such orders to be after notice. —(1) An application by the plaintiff for an order 
under rule 6 or rule 7 may be made 1*** at any time after institution of the suit.  
(2) An application by the defendant for a like order may be mad e 2*** at any time after appearance.  
1[(3) Before making an order under rule 6 or rule 7 on an application made for the purpose, the Court 
shall, except where it appears that the object of making such order would be defeated by the delay, direct 
notice th ereof to be given to the opposite party.]  
9. When party may be put in immediate possession of land the subject -matter of suit. —Where  
land paying revenue to Government, or a tenure liable to sale, is the subject -matter of a suit, if the party in 
possesion o f such land or tenure neglects to pay the Government revenue, or the rent due to the proprietor 
of the tenure , as the case may be, and such land or tenure is consequently ordered to be sold, any other 
party to the suit claimi ng to have an interest in such land or tenure may , upon payment of the revenue or 
rent due previously to the sale (and with or without security at the discretion of the Court), be put in 
immediate possession of the land or tenure ; 
and the Court in its decree may award against the defaul ter the amount so paid, with interest thereon 
at such rate as the Court thinks fit, or may charge the amount so paid, with interest thereon at such rate as 
the Court orders, in any adjustment of accounts which may be directed in the decree passed in the su it. 
10. Deposit of money, etc., in Court. —Where  the subject -matter of a suit is money or some other 
thing capable of delivery and any party thereto admits that he holds such money or other thing as a 
trustee for another party, or that it belongs or is due to another party, the Court may order the same to 
be deposited in Court or delivered to such last -named party, with or without security, subject to the 
further direction of the Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XXXIX .— In the First  Schedule,  in Order  XXXIX  — 
(a) in rule  2, in sub -rule  (2) the following  proviso  shall  be  inserted,  namely  :— 
                                                      
1. The words “after notice to the defendant” omitted by s. 86, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. The words “after notice to the plaintif f” omitted by s. 86, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  214 
 “provided that  no such  injunction shall  be granted  — 
(a) where  no perpetual  injunction  could  be  granted  in  view  of  the provisions  of section  38 and 
section  41 of the Specific  Relief  Act,  1963,  or 
(b) to stay the operation  of an order  for, transfer,  suspension,  reduction  in rank,  compulsory  
retirement,  dismissal,  removal  or otherwise  termination  of service  of,  or  taking  charge  from,  any 
employee  including  any employee  of the Government,  or 
(c) to say, any disciplinary  proceeding  pending  or  intended  or,  the effect  of any adverse  entry,  
against  any  employee  of  the Government,  or 
(d) to affect  the internal  management  or affairs  of, any educational  institution  including  a 
University,  or a society,  or 
(e) to restrain  any election,  or 
(f) to restrain, any auction intended to be made or, the effect of  any auction  made,  by the 
Government,  or 
(g) to stay the proceedings  for the recovery  of any dues  recoverable  as land revenue  unless  adequate  
security  is furnished,  or 
(h) in any matter  where  a reference  can be made  to  the Chancellor of  a University  under  any 
enactment  for the time  being  in  force  ; 
and any  order for  injunction granted in  contravention  of these  provisions  shall be void.”  ; 
(b) in rule  4 — 
(i) after the words “by the court”, the words “for reasons to be  recorded,  either  on its own  
motion  or” shall  be inserted  ; 
(ii) at the end, the following  proviso  shall  be  inserted,  namely: — 
“Provided that if at  any stage of the su it it appears to  the  Court  that the  party  in whose  favour 
the order of injunction exists  is dilating  the proceeding or is otherwise abusing the process of Court, it 
shall set  aside  the order  for injunction.”  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 13]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of order  XXXIX  of First  Schedule .— In the  First Schedule  to  the said Code, in Order XXXIX, in  
rule 2, in sub-rule (2), in the proviso,  clause  (d) shall  be omitted . 
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1991 , s. 8] 
ORDER XL  
APPOINTMENT OF R ECEIVERS  
1. Appointment of receivers. —(1) Where it appears to the Court to be just and convenient, the Court 
may by order —  
(a) appoint a receiver of any property, whether before or after decree;  
(b) remove any person from the possession or custody of the property;  
(c) commit the same to the possession, custody or management of the receiver; and  
(d) confer upon the receiver all such powers, as to bringing and defending suits and for the 
realisation, management, protection, preservation and improvement of th e property, the collection of 
the rents and profits thereof, the application and disposal of such rents and profits, and the execution 
of documents as the owner himself has, or such of those powers as the Court thinks fit.  
(2) Nothing in this rule shall au thorise the Court to remove from the possession or custody of 
property any person whom any party to the suit has not a present right so to remove.  
2. Remuneration. —The Court may by general or special order fix the amount to be paid as 
remuneration for the services of the receiver.  215 
 3. Duties. —Every  receiver so appointed shall —  
(a) furnish such security (if any) as the Court thinks fit, duly to account for what he shall receive 
in respect of the property;  
(b) submit his accounts at such periods and in such f orm as the Court directs ; 
(c) pay the amount due from him as the Court directs; and  
(d) be responsible for any loss occasioned to the property by his wilful default or gross 
negligence.  
4. Enforcement of receiver’s duties. —Where  a receiver —  
(a)  fails to submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as the Court directs, or  
(b) fails to pay amount due from him as the Court directs, or  
(c) occasions loss to the property by his wilful default or gross negligence,  
the Court may direct his property to b e attached and may sell such property, and may apply the proceeds 
to make good any amount found to be due from him or any loss occasioned by him, and shall pay the 
balance (if any) to the receiver.  
5. When Collector may he appointed receiver. —Where  the pro perty is land paying revenue to the 
Government , or land of which the revenue has been assigned or redeemed, and the Court considers that 
the interests of those concerned will be promoted by the management of the Collector, the Court may, 
with the consent o f the Collector, appoint him to be receiver of such property.  
ORDER XLI  
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES  
1. Form of appeal What to accompany memorandum. —(1) Every appeal shall be preferred in the 
form of a memorandum signed by the appellant or his pleader an d presented to the Court or to such 
officer as it appoints in this behalf. The memorandum shall be accompanied by a copy of the 1[Judgment].  
2[Provided that where two or more suits have been tried together and a common judgment has been 
delivered therefor and two or more appeals are filed against any decree covered by that judgment, 
whether by the same appellant or by different appellants, the Appellate Court may dispense with the filing 
of more than one copy of the judgment.]  
(2) Contents of memorandum. —The memorandum shall set forth, concisely and under distinct 
heads, the grounds of objection to the decree appealed from without any argument or narrative; and such 
grounds shall be numbered consecutively.  
1[(3) Where the appeal is against a decree for payme nt of money, the appellant shall, within such time 
as the Appellate Court may allow, deposit the amount disputed in the appeal or furnish such security in 
respect thereof as the Court may think fit.]  
2. Grounds which may be taken in appeal. —The appellant s hall not, except by leave of the Court, 
urge or be heard in support of any ground of objection not set forth in the memorandum of appeal; but the 
Appellate Court, in deciding the appeal, shall not be confined to the grounds of objections set forth in the 
memorandum of appeal or taken by leave of the Court under this rule:  
Provided that the Court shall not rest its decision on any other ground unless the party who may be 
affected thereby has had a sufficient opportunity of contesting the case on that ground.  
3. Rejection or amendment of memorandum. —(1) Where the memorandum of appeal is not drawn 
up in the manner hereinbefore prescribed, it may be rejected, or be returned to the appellant for the 
purpose of being amended within a time to be fixed by the Court or be amended then and there.  
(2) Where the Court rejects any memorandum, it shall record the reasons for such rejection.  
(3) Where a memorandum of appeal is amended, the judge, or such officer as he appoints in this 
behalf , shall sign or initial the amend ment.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999 , s. 31 , for certain words,  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  216 
 1[3A. Application for condonation of delay. —(1) When an appeal is presented after the expiry of 
the period of limitation specified therefore, it shall be accompanied by an application supported by 
affidavit setting forth the facts on which the appell ant relies to satisfy the Court that he had sufficient 
cause for not preferring the appeal within such period.  
(2) If the Court sees no reason to reject the application without the issue of a notice to the respondent, 
notice hereof shall be issued to the r espondent and the matter shall be finally decided by the Court before 
it proceeds to deal with the appeal under rule 11 or rule 13, as the case may be.  
(3) Where an application has been made under sub -rule ( 1), the Court shall not make an order fact the 
stay of execution of the decree against which the appeal is proposed to be filed so long as the Court does 
not, after hearing under rule 11, decide to hear the appeal.]  
4. One of several plaintiffs or defendants may obtain reversal of whole decree where it p roceeds 
on ground common to all. —Where  there are more plaintiffs or more defendants than one in a suit, and 
the decree appealed from proceeds on any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the defendants, 
any one of the plaintiffs or of the defendant s may appeal from the whole decree, and thereupon the 
Appellate Court may reverse or vary the decree in favour of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as the case 
may be. 
Stay of proceedings and of execution  
5. Stay by Appellate Court. —(I) An appeal shall not  operate as a stay of proceedings under a decree 
or order appealed from except so far as the Appellate Court may order, nor shall execution of a decree be 
stayed by reason only of an appeal having been preferred from the decree ; but the Appellate Court may  
for sufficient cause order stay of execution of such decree.  
1[Explanation. —An order by the Appellate Court for the stay of execution of  the decree shall be 
effective from the date of the communication of such order to the Court of first instance, but an 
affidavit sworn  
by the appellant, based on his personal knowledge, stating that an order for the stay of execution of the 
decree has been made by the Appellate Court shall, pending the receipt from the Appellate Court of the 
order for the stay of execution  or any order to the contrary, be acted upon by the Court of first instance.]  
(2) Stay by Court which passed the decree. —Where an application is made for stay of execution of 
an appealable decree before the expiration of the time allowed for appealing ther efrom, the Court which 
passed the decree may on sufficient cause being shown order the execution to be stayed.  
(3) No order for stay of execution shall be made under sub -rule ( 1) or sub -rule ( 2) unless the Court 
making it is satisfied —  
(a) that substantia l loss may result to the party applying for stay of execution unless the order is 
made;  
(b) that the application has been made without unreasonable delay; and  
(c) that security has been given by the applicant for the due performance of such decree or order  
as may ultimately be binding upon him.  
(4) 1[Subject to the provision of sub -rule ( 3),] the Court may make an ex parte  order for stay of 
execution pending the hearing of the application.  
2[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -rules,  where the appellant fails to 
make the deposit or furnish the security specified in sub -rule ( 3) of rule 1, the Court shall not make an 
order staying the execution of the decree.]  
6. Security in case of order for execution of decree appealed from. —(1) Wher e an order is made 
for the execution of a decree from which an appeal is pending, the Court which passed the decree shall, 
on sufficient cause being shown by the appellant, require security to be taken for the restitution of any 
property which may be or ha s been taken in execution of the decree or for the payment of the value of 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  217 
 such property and for the due performance of the decree or order of the Appellate Court, or the Appellate 
Court may for like cause direct the Court which passed the decree to take s uch security.  
(2) Where an order has been made for the sale of immovable property in execution of a decree, and an 
appeal is pending from such decree, the sale shall, on the application of the judgment -debtor to the Court 
which made the order, be stayed o n such terms as to giving security or otherwise as the Court thinks fit 
until the appeal is disposed of.   
7. 1[No security to be required from the Government or a public officer in certain cases .] Rep. by the  
A.O. 1937.  
8. Exercise of power in appeal from order made in execution of decree. —The powers conferred 
by rules 5 and 6 shall be exercisable where an appeal may be or has been preferred not from the decree 
but from an order made in execution of such decree.  
Procedure on admission of appeal  
2[9. Registr y of memorandum of appeal. —(1) The Court from whose decree an appeal lies shall 
entertain the memorandum of appeal and shall endorse thereon the date of presentation and shall register 
the appeal in a book of appeal kept for that purpose.  
(2) Such book sha ll be called the register of appeal.]  
10. Appellate Court may require appellant to furnish security for costs. —(1) The Appellate 
Court may in its discretion, either before the respondent is called upon to appear and answer or afterwards 
on the application  of the respondent, demand from the appellant security for the costs of the appeal, or of 
the original suit, or of both:  
Where appellant resides out of India. —Provided that the Court shall demand such security in all 
cases in which the appellant is residin g out of 3[India], and is not possessed of any sufficient immovable 
property within 5[India] other than the property (if any) to which the appeal relates.  
(2) Where such security is not furnished within such time as the Court orders, the Court shall reject  
the appeal.  
11. Power to dismiss appeal without sending notice to Lower Court. —4[(1) The appellate Court 
after fixing a day for hearing the appellant or his pleader and hearing him accordingly if he appears on 
that day may dismiss the appeal].  
(2) If on t he day fixed or arty other day to which the hearing may be adjourned the appellant does not 
appear when the appeal is called on for hearing, the Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed.  
(3) The dismissal of an appeal under this rule shall be n otified to the Court from whose decree the 
appeal is preferred.  
5[(4) Where an Appellate Court, not being the High Court, dismisses an appeal under sub -rule ( 1), it 
shall deliver a judgment, recording in brief its grounds for doing so, and a decree shall b e drawn up in 
accordance with the judgment.] 
2[11A. Time within which hearing under rule 11 shou ld be concluded. —Every  appeal shall be 
hear under rule 11 as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall  be made to conclude such hearing 
within sixty days fr om the date on which the memorandum of appeal is filed. ] 
12. Day for hearing appeal. —(1) Unless the Appellate Court dismisses the appeal under rule 11, it 
shall fix a day for hearing the appeal.  
6[(2) Such day shall be fixed with reference to the current b usiness of the Court .] 
13. [Appellate Court to give notice to Court whose decree appealed from .] Omitted by Code 
of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act 1999 , (46 of 1999), s. 31 (w.e.f.  1-7-2002.)    
                                                      
1. See o rder XXVII, rule 8A, supra . 
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31, for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”.   
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31, for sub -rule (1) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976,  s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31, for sub -rule ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  218 
 14. Publication and service of notice of day for hearing appe al.—(1) Notice of the day fixed under 
rule 12 shall be affixed in the Appellate Court -house, and a like notice shall be sent by the Appellate 
Court to the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred , and shall be served on the respondent or on 
his plea der in the Appellate Court in the manner provided for the service on a defendant of a summons to 
appear and answer, and all the provisions applicable to such summons , and to proceedings with reference 
to the service thereof, shall apply to the service of s uch notice.  
(2) Appellate Court may itself cause notice to be served. —Instead of sending the notice to the 
Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, the Appellate Court may itself cause the notice to be 
served on the respondent or his pleader under the provisions above referred to.  
2[(3) The notice to be served on the respondent shall be accompanied by a copy of the memorandum 
of appeal. 
(4) Notwithstanding  anything to the contrary contained in sub -rule ( 1), it shall not be necessary to 
serve notice of any proceeding incidental to an appeal on any respondent other than a person impleaded 
for the fir st time in the Appellate Court, unless he has appeared and filed an address for the service in the 
Court of first instance or has appeared in the appeal.  
(5) Nothing in sub -rule (4) shall bar the respondent referred to in the appeal from defending it.]  
15. [ Contents of notice .] Omitted by Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act 1999 , (46 of 
1999), s. 31 (w.e.f.  1-7-2002.)   
 Procedure on hearing  
16. Right to  begin. —(1) On the day fixed, or on any other day to which the hearing may be 
adjourned , the appellant shall be heard in support of the appeal.  
(2) The Court shall then, if it does not dismiss the appeal at once, hear the respondent against the 
appeal, and  in such case the appellant shall be entitled to reply.  
17. Dismissal of appeal for appellants ’ default. —(1) Where on the day fixed, or on any other day to 
which the hearing may be adjourned, the appellant does not appear when the appeal is called on for 
hearing, the Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed.  
1[Explanation. —Nothing in this sub -rule shall be construed as empowering the Court to dismiss the 
appeal on the merits.]  
(2) Hearing appeal ex parte .—Where the appellant appears and the resp ondent does not appear, the 
appeal shall be heard ex parte.  
18. [Dismissal of appeal where notice not served in consequence of appellant’s failure to deposit 
cost.]omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure  (Amendment )Act,1 9 9 9  (46 of 1999)  s. 31 (w.e.f.  1-7-
2002). 
19. Re-admission of appeal dismissed for default . —Where an appeal is dismissed under rule 11 , 
sub-rule (2) or rule 17  2[***] the appellant may apply to the Appellate Court for the re -admission of the 
appeal; and, where it is proved that he was preven ted by any sufficient cause from appearing when the 
appeal was , called on for hearing or from depositing the sum so required, the Court shall re -admit the 
appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.  
20. Power to adjourn hearing and dire ct persons appearing interested to be made respondents.  —
3[(1)] Where it appears to the Court at the hearing that any person who was a party to the suit in the Court from 
whose decree the appeal is preferred, but who has not been made a party to the appeal , is interested in the 
result of the appeal, the Court may adjourn the hearing to a future day to be fixed by the Court and direct that 
such person be made a respondent.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2.  The words “or rule 18” omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31, (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Rule 20 re -numbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  219 
 1[(2) No respondent shall be added under this rule, after the expiry of the period of limitation for 
appeal , unless the Court , for reasons to be recorded, allows that to be done, on such terms as to costs as it 
thinks fit.]  
21. Re-hearing on application of respondent against whom ex parte  decree made. —Where  an 
appeal is heard ex parte and j udgment is pronounced against the respondent, he may apply to the 
Appellate Court to re -hear the appeal ; and, if he satisfies the Court that the notice was not duly served or 
that he was prevented by sufficient cause from appearing when the appeal was cal led on for hearing, the 
Court shall re -hear the appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit to impose upon him.  
22. Upon hearing respondent may object to decree as if he had preferred separate appeal. —(1) 
Any respondent, though he may no t have appealed from any part of the decree, may not only support the 
decree 2[but may also state that the finding against him in the Court below in respect of any issue ought to 
have been in his favour ; and may also take any cross -objection] to the decree  which he could have taken 
by way of appeal provided he has filed such objection in the Appellate Court within one month from the 
date of service on him or his pleader of notice of the day fixed for hearing the appeal, or within such 
further time as the Ap pellate Court may se e fit to allow.  
4[Explanation. —A respondent aggrieved by a finding of the Court in the judgment on which the 
decree appealed against is based may, under this rule, file cross -objection in respect of the decree in so far 
as it is based on that finding, notwithstanding that by reason of the decision of the Court on any other 
finding which is sufficient for the decision of the suit, the decree, is, wholly or in part, in favour of that 
respondent.]  
(2) Form of objection and provisions appli cable thereto .—Such  cross -objection shall be in the 
form of a memorandum, and the provisions of rule 1, so far as they relate to the form and contents of the 
memorandum of appeal , shall apply thereto.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
 
 (4) Where, in any case in which an y respondent has under this rule filed a memorandum of objection, the 
original appeal is withdrawn or is dismissed for default, the objection so filed may nevertheless be heard and 
determined after such notice to the other parties as the Court thinks fit.  
(5) The provisions relating to appeals  by indigent persons shall, so far as they can be made applicable, 
apply to an objection under this rule.  
23. Remand of case by Appellate Court. —Where  the Court from whose decree an appeal is preferred 
has disposed of the suit upon a preliminary point and the decree is reversed in appeal, the Appellate Court may, 
if it thinks fit, by order remand the case, and may further direct what issue or issues shall be tried in the case so 
remanded, and shall send a copy of its ju dgment and order to the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred, which directions to re -admit the suit under its original number in the register of civil suits, and 
proceed to determine the suit; and the evidence (if any) recorded during the origin al trial shall, subject to all 
just exceptions, be evidence during the trial after remand.  
4[23A. Remand in other cases. —Where the Court from whose decree an app eal is preferred has 
disposed of the case otherwise than on a preliminary point, and the decree  is reversed in appeal and a               
re-trial is considered necessary, the Appellate Court shall have the same powers as it has under rule 23 . 
24. Where evidence on record sufficient Appellate Court may determine case finally.—Where the 
evidence upon  the record is sufficient to enable the Appellate Court to pronounce judgement, the Appellate 
Court may, after resettling the issues, if necessary, finally determine the suit, notwithstanding that the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 87, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs -rule ( 3) omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002 ).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  220 
 judgment of the Court from whose decree the appeal is p referred has proceeded wholly upon some ground 
other than that on which the Appellate Court proceeds.  
25. Where Appellate Court may frame issues and refer them for trial to Court whose decree 
appealed from. —Where  the Court from whose decree the appeal is p referred has omitted to frame or try 
any issue, or to determine any question of fact, which appears to the Appellate Court essential to the right 
decision of the suit upon the merits, the Appellate Court may, if necessary, frame issues, and refer the 
same for trial to the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, and in such case shall direct such 
Court to take the additional evidence required;  
and such Court shall proceed to try such issues, and shall return the evidence to the Appellate Court 
toget her with its findings thereon and the reasons therefor 1[within such time as may be fixed by the 
Appellate Court or extended by it from time to time].  
26. Findings and evidence to be put on record. Objections to findings. —(1) Such evidence and 
findings sha ll form part of the record in the suit; and either party may, within a time to be fixed by the 
Appellate Court, present a memorandum of objections to any finding.  
(2) Determination of appeal. —After  the expiration of the period so fixed for presenting such 
memorandum the Appellate Court shall proceed to determine the appeal.  
1[26A. Order of remand to mention date of next hearing. —Where  the Appellate Court remands a 
case under rule 23 or rule 23A, or frames issues and refers them for trial under rule 25, it s hall fix a date 
for the appearance of the parties before the Court from whose decree the appeal was preferred for the 
purpose of receiving the directions of that Court as to further proceedings in the suit.]  
27. Production of additional evidence in Appella te Court. —(1) The parties to an appeal shall not be 
entitled to produce additional evidence, whether oral or documentary, in the Appellate Court. But if  — 
(a) the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to admit evidence which 
ought to have been admitted, or  
1[(aa) the party seeking to produce additional evidence, establishes that notwithstanding the 
exercise of due diligence, such evidence was not within his knowledge or could not , after the exercise of 
due diligence, be produced by him  at the time when the decree appealed against was passed, or]  
(b) the Appellate Court requires any document to be produced or any witness to be  examined to 
enable it to pronounce judgment, or for any other substantial cause,  
the Appellate Court may allow s uch evidence or document to be produced, or witness to be examined.  
(2) Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced by an Appellate Court, the Court shall 
record the reason for its admission.  
28. Mode of taking additional evidence. —Wherever  additional evidence is a llowed to be produced, 
the Appellate Court may either take such evidence, or direct the Court from whose d ecree the appeal is  
preferred,  or any other subordinate Court, to take such evidence and to send it when ta ken to the 
Appe llate Co urt. 
29. Points to be defined and recorded. —Where  additional evidence is  directed or allowed to be 
taken , the Appellate Court shall specify the points to which the evidence is to be co nfined,  and record on 
its proceedings the points so specified.  
Judgment in appeal  
30. Judgment when and where pronounced. —2[(1)] The Appellate Court, after hearing the parties 
or their pleaders and referring to any part of the proceedings, whether on appeal or in the Court from 
whose decree the appeal is preferred, to which re ference may be considered necessary, shall pronounce 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Rule 30 re -numbered as sub -rule ( 1) by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  221 
 judgment in open Court, either at once or on some future day of which notice shall be given to the parties 
or their pleaders.  
1[(2) Where a written judgment is to be pronounced, it shall be sufficient if  the points for determination, 
the decision thereon and the final order passed in the appeal are read out and it shall not  be necessary for the 
Court to read out the whole judgment, but a copy of the whole judgment shall be made available for the 
perusal o f the parties or their pleaders immediately after the judgment is pronounced.]  
31. Contents, date and signature of judgment. —The judgment of the Appellate Court shall be in 
writing and shall state —  
(a) the points for determination;  
(b) the decision thereo n; 
(c) the reasons for the decision; and  
(d) where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, the relief to which the appellant is 
entitled,  
and shall at the time that it is pronounced be signed and dated by the Judge or by the Judges concurring 
there in. 
32. What judgment may direct. —The judgment may be for confirming, varying or reversing the 
decree from which the appeal is preferred, or, if the parties to the appeal agree as to the form which the 
decree in appeal shall take, or as to the order to be made in appeal, the Appellate Court may pass a decree 
or make an order accordingly.  
33. Power of Court of Appeal. —The Appellate Court shall have power to pass any decree and make 
any order which ought to have been passed or made and to pass or make such fu rther or other decree or 
order as the case may require, and this power may be exercised by the Court notwithstanding that the 
appeal is as to part only of the decree and may be exercised in favour of all or any of the respondents or 
parties, although such respondents or parties may not have filed any appeal or objection 1[and may, where 
there have been decrees in cross -suits or where two or more decrees are passed in one suit, be exercised in 
respect of all or any of the decrees, although an appeal may not have been filed against such decrees]:  
1[Provided that the Appellate Court shall not make any order under section 35A in pursuance of any 
objection on which the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has omitted or refused to make 
such order.]  
Illustration  
A claims a sum of money as due to him from X or Y, and in a suit against both obtains a decree against X. X, 
appeals and A and Y are respondents. The Appellate Court decides in favour of X. It has power to pass a decree 
against Y.  
34. Dissent to be recorded. —Where the Appeal is heard by more judges than one, any judge 
dissenting from the judgment of the Court shall state in writing the decision or order which he thinks 
should be passed on the appeal, and he may state his reasons for the same.  
Decr ee in appeal  
235. Date and contents of decree. —(1) The decree of the Appellate Court shall bear date the day on 
which the judgment was pronounced.  
(2) The decree shall contain the number of the appeal, the names and descriptions of the appellant and 
respon dent, and a clear specification of the relief granted or other adjudication made.  
(3) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the appeal, and by whom, or out of 
what property, and in what proportions such costs and the costs in the suit  are to be paid.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 4, which under s. 1( 2) thereof, may be brou ght into force in any State by the State  Government on any 
specified date. The Act has been brought into force in Bombay, Bengal, U.P., Punjab, Bihar, C.P. Assam, Orissa and Tamil 
Nadu.  
2. This rule is not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh in the exer cise of its appellate Jurisdiction; see the Oudh Courts Act,  
1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925), s. 16( 3).  222 
 (4) The decree shall be signed and dated by the Judge or Judges who passed it:  
Judge dissenting from judgment need not sign decree. —Provided that where there are more 
Judges than one and there is a difference of opinion among them, it shal l not be necessary for any Judge 
dissenting from the judgment of the Court to sign the decree.  
36. Copies of judgment and decree to be furnished to parties. —Certified  copies of the judgment and 
decree in appeal shall be furnished to the parties on applicat ion to the Appellate Court and at their expense.  
37. Certified copy of decree to be  sent to Court whose decree appealed from. —A copy of the 
judgment and of the decree, certified by the Appellate Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall 
be sent to the Court which passed the decree appealed from and shall be filed with the original proceedings in 
the suit, and an entry of the judgment of the Appellate Court shall be made in the register of civil suits.  
ORDER XLII  
APPEALS FROM  APPELLATE  DECRE ES 
1. Procedure. —The rules of Order XLI shall apply,  so far as may be, to appeals from appellate decrees.  
1[2. Power of Court to direct that the appeal be heard on the question formulated by it —At the time  
of making an order under rule 11 of Order XLI for  the hearing of a second appeal, the Court shall formulate 
the substantial question of law as required by section 100, and in doing so, the Court may direct that the second 
appeal be heard on the question so formulated and it shall not be open to the appel lant to urge any other ground 
in the appeal without the leave of the Court, given in accordance with the provision of section 100.  
3. Application of rule 14 of Order XL I.—Reference in sub -rule ( 4) of rule 14 of Order XLI to the 
Court of first instance shal l, in the case of an appeal from an appellate decree or order, be construed as a 
reference to the Court to which the appeal was preferred from the original decree or order.]  
 
ORDER XLIII  
APPEALS  FROM  ORDERS  
1. Appeal from orders. —An appeal shall lie from t he following orders under the provisions of 
section 104, namely: — 
(a) an order under rule 10 of Order VII returning a plaint to be presented to the proper Court 
2[except where the procedure specified in rule 10A of Order VII has been followed];  
3 *    *   *   *   * 
(c). an order under rule 9 of order IX rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an order 
to set aside the dismissal of a suit ; 
(d) an order under rule 13 of Order IX rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an 
order  to set aside a decree passed ex parte;  
2*    *   *   *   *  
(f) an order under rule 21 of Order XI;  
2*    *   *   *   *  
(i) an order under rule 34 of Order XXI on an objection to the draft of a document or of an 
endorsement;  
(j) an order under rule 72 or  rule 92 of Order XXI setting aside or refusing to set aside a sale;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 88 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 89 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
3. Cls. (b), (e), (g), (h), (m), (o) and ( v) omitted b y s. 89, ibid, (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
 223 
 1[ja) an order rejecting an application made under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 106 of Order XXI, provided 
that an order on the original application, that is to say, the application referred to i n sub -rule (1) of rule 
105 of that Order is appealable;]  
(k) an order under rule 9 of Order XXII refusing to set aside the abatement or dismissal of a suit;  
(l) an order under rule 10 of Order XXII giving or refusing to give leave;  
2*    *   *   *   *  
 (n) an order under rule 2 of Order XXV rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an 
order to set aside the dismissal of a suit;  
1[(na) an order under rule 5 or rule 7 of Order XXXIII rejecting an application for permission to 
sue as an indigen t person ;] 
2*     *   *   *   *  
(p) orders in interpleader -suits under rule 3, rule 4 or rule 6 of Order XXXV;  
(q) an order under rule 2, rule 3 or rule 6 of order (XXVIII ); 
(r) an order under rule 1 , rule 2 1[rule 2A], rule 4 or rule 10 of Order XXXIX;  
(s) an order under rule 1 , or rule 4 of Order XL;  
(t) an order of refusal under rule 19 of Order XLI to re -admit, or under rule 21 of Order XLI to              
re-hear, an appeal;  
(u) an order under rule 23 1[or rule 23A ] of Order XLI remanding a case, where an appeal would lie 
from the decree of the Appellate Court;  
2*  *   *   *   *  
 (w) an order under rule 4 of Order XLVII granting an application for review.  
1[1A. Right to challenge non -appealable orders in appeal ag ainst decrees. —(1) Where any order 
is made under this Code against a party and thereupon any judgment is pronounced against such party and 
a decree is drawn up, such party may, in an appeal against the decree, contend that such order should not 
have been m ade and the judgment should not have been pronounced. 
(2) In an appeal against a decree passed in a suit after recording a compromise or refusing to record a 
compromise, it shall be open to the appellant to contest the decree on the ground that the comprom ise 
should, or should not, have been recorded.]  
2. Procedure. —The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may be , to appeals from orders.  
ORDER XL IV 
2[APPEALS  BY INDIGENT  PERSONS ] 
1. Who may appeal 3[as an indigent person].  —4[(1)] Any person entitled to  prefer an appeal, who 
is unable to pay the fee required for the memorandum of appeal, may present an application accompanied 
by a memorandum of appeal, and may be allowed to appeal as an 5[indigent person], subject, in all 
matters, including the presentat ion of such application, to the provisions relating to suits by 5[indigent 
persons], in so far as those provisions are applicable.  
6*   *   *   *   * 
7*   *   *   *   * 
8[2. Grant of time for payment of court -fee.—Where  an application is rejected under rul e 1, the Court 
may, while rejecting the application, allow the applicant to pay the requisite Court -fee, within such time as 
may be fixed by the Court or extended by it from time to time; and upon such payment, the memorandum of 
appeal in respect of which such fee is payable shall have the same force and effect as if such fee had been 
paid in the first instance.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 89 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2.  Subs. by s. 90, ibid., for “pauper appeals ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 90, ibid., for “as pauper ” (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
4. Rule 1 re -numbered as sub -rule (1) by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14.  
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 90, for “pauper ” and “paupers ” respectively (w.e.f 1 -2-1977),  
6. Proviso omitted by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14.  
7. Sub-rule (2) ins. by s. 14, ibid. and omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 90 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).   
8. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 90, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  224 
 3. Inquiry as to whether applicant is an indigent person. —(1) Where an applicant, referred to in 
rule 1, was allowed to sue or appeal as an indigen t person  in the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred, no further inquiry in respect of the question whether or not he is an indigent person shall be 
necessary if the applicant has made an affidavit stating that he has not ceased to be an indigen t person 
since the date of the decree appealed from; but if the Government Pleader or the respondent disputes the 
truth of the statement made in such affidavit, an inquiry into the question aforesaid shall be held by the 
Appellate Court , or, under the orde rs of the Appellate Court, by an officer of th at Court.  
(2) Where the applicant, referred to in rule 11, is alleged to have become an indigent person since the 
date of the decree appealed from, the inquiry into the question whether or not he is an indigent  person 
shall be made by the Appellate Court or, under the orders of the Appellate Court, by an officer of that 
Court unless the Appellate Court considers it necessary in the circumstances of the case that the inquiry 
should be held by the Court from whose  decision the appeal is preferred.]  
ORDER XLV  
APPEALS TO THE  1[SUPREME  COURT ] 
1. “Decree ” defined. —In this Order, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, 
the expression “decree ” shall include a final order.  
2. Application to Court  whose decree complained of. —2[(1)] Whoever desires to appeal 3[the 
Supreme Court] shall apply by petition to the Court whose decree is complained of.  
 4[(2) Every petition under sub -rule (1) shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall 
be made to conclude the disposal of the petition within sixty days from the date on which the petition is  
presented to the Court under sub -rule ( 1).] 
3. Certificate as to value or fitness.  —5[(1) Every petition shall state the grounds of appeal and pray 
for a certificate —  
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance, and  
(ii) that in the opinion of the Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme 
Court.]  
(2) Upon receipt of such petition, the Court shall dire ct notice to be served on the opposite party to 
show cause why the said certificate should not be granted.  
4. [Consolidation of  suits. ] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)  Act, 1973 (49 of 1973 ), 
s. 4 (w.e.f.  1-2-1977) . 
5. [Remission of dispute  to Court of first instance. ] Rep. by s. 4, ibid. ( w.e.f.  1-2-1977) . 
6. Effect of refusal of certificate. —Where  such certificate is refused, the petition shall be 
dismissed.  
7. Security and deposit required on grant of certificate. —(1) Where the certificat e is granted, the 
applicant shall, within 6[ninety days or such further period , not exceeding sixty days, as the Court may 
upon cause sh own allow;] from the date of the decree complained of, or within six weeks from the date of 
the grant of the certificate  whichever is the later date, — 
(a) furnish security 7[in cash or in Government securities] for the costs of the respondent, and  
(b) deposit the amount required to defray the expense of translating, transcribing indexing  
8[printing, ] and transmitting to 3[the Supreme Court] a correct copy of the whole record of the suit, 
except —  
(1) formal documents directed to be excluded by any 9[Rule of the Supreme Court] in force 
for the time being;  
(2) papers which the parties agree to exclude;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “King -in-Council ”. 
2. Rule 2 re -numbered as sub -rule ( 1) of that rule by Act 104 of 1976, s. 91 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "His Majesty in Council".  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 91 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by Act 49 of 1973, s. 4, for sub -rule ( 1). 
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 1920, s. 3, for “six months ”. 
7. Ins. by s. 3, ibid.  
8. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
9. Subs. , ibid., for “order of His Ma jesty  in Council”.  225 
 (3) accounts, or porti ons of accounts, which the officer empowered by the Court for that 
purpose considers unnecessary, and which the parties have not specifically asked to be 
included; and  
(4) such other documents as the High Court may direct to be excluded:  
1[Provided that th e Court at the time of granting the certificate may, after hearing any opposite party 
who appears, order on the ground of special hardship that some other form of security may be furnished:  
Provided further, that no adjournment shall be granted to an oppos ite party to contest the nature of 
such security.]  
2*   *   *   *   * 
8. Admission of appeal and procedure thereon. —Where  such security has been furnished and 
deposit made to the satisfaction of the Court, the court shall — 
(a) declare the appeal admitted,  
(b) give notice thereof to the respondent,  
(c) transmit to 3[the Supreme Court] under the seal of the Court a correct copy of the said record, 
except as aforesaid, and  
(d) give to either party one or more authenticated copies of any of the papers in the su it on his 
applying therefore and paying the reasonable expenses incurred in preparing them.  
9. Revocation of acceptance of security. —At any time before the admission of the appeal the Court 
may, upon cause shown, revoke the acceptance of any such security,  and make further directions thereon.  
4[9A. Power to dispense with notices in case of deceased parties. —Nothing  in these rules requiring 
any notice to be served on or given to an opposite party or respondent shall be deemed to require any 
notice to be serv ed on or given to the legal representative of any deceased opposite party or deceased 
respondent in a case, where such opposite party or respondent did not appear either at the hearing in the 
Court whose decree is complained of or at any proceedings subseq uent to the decree of that Court : 
Provided that notices under sub -rule ( 2) of rule 3 and under rule 8 shall be given by affixing the same 
in some conspicuous place in the court -house of the Judge of the district in which the suit was originally 
brought,  and by publication in such newspapers as the Court may direct.]  
10. Power to order further security or payment .—Where at any time after the admission of an 
appeal but before the transmission of the copy of the record, except as aforesaid, to 3[the Supreme Co urt], 
such security appears inadequate,  
or further payment is required for the purpose of translating, transcribing, printing, indexing or 
transmitting the copy of the record, except as aforesaid , 
the Court may order the appellant to furnish, within a time  to be fixed by the Court, other and 
sufficient security, o r to make, within like time, the required payment.  
11. Effect of failure to comply with order. —Where the appellant fails to comply with such order, 
the proceedings shall be stayed,  
and the appeal s hall not proceed without an order in this behalf of , 3[the Supreme Court],  
and in the meantime execution of the decree appealed from shall not be stayed.  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 26 of 1920, s. 3.  
2. Sub-rule (2) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “his Majesty in Council ”. 
4. Ins. by Act 26 of 1920, s . 4. 
 226 
 12. Refund of balance deposit. —When the copy of the record, except as afor esaid, has been 
transmitted  to 1[the Supreme Court], the appellant may obtain a refund of the balance (if any) of the 
amount which he has deposited under rule 7.  
13. Powers of Court pending appeal .—(1) Notwithstanding the grant of a certificate for the 
admission of any appeal, the d ecree appealed from shall be unconditionally executed, unless the Court 
otherwise directs.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, on special cause shown by any party interested in the suit, or 
otherwise appearing to the Court, —  
(a) impound  any movable prope rty in dispute or any part thereof, or  
(b) allow the  decree appealed from to be executed, taking such security from the respondent as 
the Court thinks fit for the due performance of any order which 1[the Supreme Court] may make on 
the appeal, or  
(c) stay t he execution of the decree appealed from, taking such security from the appellant as the 
Court thinks fit for the due performan ce of the decree appealed from, or of 2[any decree or order] 
which 1[the Supreme Court] may make on the appeal , or 
(d) place any party seeking the assistance of the Court under such conditions or give such other 
direction respecting the subject -matter of the appeal, as it thinks fit, by the appointment of a receiver 
or otherwise.  
14. Increase of security found inadequate .—(1) Where at any time during the pendency of the 
appeal the security furnished by either party appears inadequate , the Court may, on the application of the 
other party, require further security.  
(2) In default of such further security being furnished as required by the Court, —  
(a) if the original security was furnished by the appellant, the Court may,  on the application of the 
respondent, execute the decree, appealed from as if the appellant had furnished no such security:  
(b) if the original security was furnished by the respondent, the Court shall, so far as may be 
practicable, stay the further execution of the decree, and restore the parties to the position in which 
they respectively were when the security which appears inadequate was furnished, or give such 
direc tion respecting the subject -matter of the appeal as it thinks fit.  
15. Procedure to enforce orders of the Supreme Court .—(1) Whoever desires to obtain execution 
of  2[any decree or order] of 1[the Supreme Court] shall apply by petition, accompan ied by a ce rtified copy 
of the decree passed or order made in appeal and sought to be executed, to the Court from which the 
appeal to 3[the Supreme Court] was preferred.  
(2) Such  Court shall transmit the 4[decree or order] of 1[the Supreme Court] to the Court  which p assed 
the first decree appealed from, or to such other Court as 1[the Supreme Court] by such 4[decree or order] 
may direct and shall (upon the application of either party) give such directions as may be require d for the 
execution of the same;  and the Court  to which the said  4[decree or order] is so transmitted shall execute it 
accordingly, in the manner and according to the provisions applicable to the execution of its original 
decrees.  
5*       *   *   *   *  
                                                      
1. Subs., by the A.O. 1950, for “His Majesty in Council ”. 
2. Subs., ibid., for “any order”.  
3. Subs., ibid., for “His Majesty”.  
4. Subs., ibid.,  for “order”.  
5. Sub -rule ( 3) omitted by the A.O. 1950.    227 
 1[(4) 2[Unless the Supreme Court otherwise dir ects, no decree or order of that Court ] shall be 
inoperative on the ground that no notice has been served on or given to the legal representative of any 
deceased opposite party or deceased respondent in a case , where such opposite party or respondent did 
not appear either at the hearing in the Court whose decree was complained of or at any proceedings 
subsequent to the decree of that Court, but such order shall have the same force and effect as if it had 
been made before the death took place. ] 
16. Appeal fr om order relating to execution. —The orders made by the Court which executes the 
3[decree or order ] of 4[the Supreme Court], relating to such execution, shall be appealable in the same 
manner and subject to the same rules as the orders of such Court relatin g to the execution of its own 
decrees.  
17. [Appeals to Federal Court .] Rep. by the Federal Act, 1941 (21 of 1941), s. 2.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XLV.  In the  First  Schedule,  in Order XLV,  in rule  2,  
after  sub- rule (2), the following  sub-rule shall  be inserted,  namely  :— 
“(3)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub -rule  (1), whoever desires  to appeal  to 
the  Supreme  Court,  may  apply  orally  to  the Court  whose  decree  is to be complained  of, 
immediately  before  or 
after the  pronouncement of the judgment by the Court, for a certificate  contemplated  in 
sub-rule  (1) of rule  3, and  the Court  may  either  grant  or refuse  the certificate,  or direct  
the applicant  to file a petition  as  required  by sub -rule  (1) ; 
Provided  that  if an o ral application  is  entertained  and  rejected,  no written  petition  under  
sub -rule  (1) shall  lie.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 56 of 1957, s. 14]  
ORDER XLVI  
REFERENCE  
1. Reference of question to High Court. —Where , before or on the hearing of a suit or an appe al in 
which the decree is not subject to appeal, or where,  in the execution of any such decree, any question of 
law or usage having the force of law arises, on which the C ourt trying the suit or appeal,  or executing the 
decree , entertains reasonabl e doubt,  the Court may,  either of its own motion or on the ap plication of any 
of the parties,  draw up a statement  of the facts of the case and the point on which doubt is entertain ed, 
and refer such statement with its own opinion on the point for the decision of the High Court.  
2. Court may pass decree contingent upon decision of High Court. —The Court may either stay 
the proceedings or proceed in the case notwithstanding such reference , and may pass a decree or make an 
order cont ingent upon the decision of the High Court on the point referred:  
But no decree or order shall be executed in any case in which such reference is made until the receipt 
of a copy of the judgment of the High Court upon the reference.  
3. Judgment of High Court to be transmitted and case dispo sed of accordingly. —The High 
Court,  after hearing the parties if they  appear and desire to be heard, shall decide the point so referred, 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1920, s. 5.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Unless His Majesty in Council i s pleased otherwise to direct , no order of His Majesty in 
Council”.  
3. Subs., ibid., for “order”.  
4. Subs., ibid.,  for “His Majesty in Council”.    228 
 and shall transmit a copy of its judgment , under  the signature of the Registrar,  to the Court by which the 
reference wa s made ; and such Court  shall, on the receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in 
conformity with the decision of the High Court.  
4. Cost of reference to High Court. —The costs (if any) consequent on a reference for the decision 
of the High Court shal l be costs in the case.  
1[4A. Reference to High Court under proviso to section 113. —The provisions of rules 2 , 3 and 4 
shall apply to any reference by the Court under the proviso to section 113 as they apply to a reference 
under rule 1 ; and] 
5. Power  to al ter, etc., decree of Court making reference. —Where a case is referred to the High 
Court under rule 5[or under the proviso to section 113] , the High Court may return the case for 
amendment , and may alter, cancel or set aside any decree or order which the Co urt making the reference 
has passed or made in the case out of which the reference arose, and make such order as it thinks fit.  
6. Power to refer to High Court questions as to jurisdiction in small causes. —(1) Where at any 
time before judgment a Court in w hich a suit has been instituted doubts whether the suit is cognizable by 
a Court of Small Causes or is not so cognizable, it may submit the record to the High Court with a 
statement of its reasons for the doubt as to the nature of the suit.  
(2) On receivi ng the record and statement, the High Court may order the Court either to proceed with 
the suit or to return the plaint for presentation to such other Court as it may in its order declare to be 
competent to take cognizance of the suit.  
7. Power to District  Court to submit for revision proceeding had under mistake as to 
jurisdiction in small causes. —(1) Where it appears to a District Court that a Court subordinate thereto 
has, by reason of erroneously holding a suit to be cognizable by a Court of Small Cause s or not to be so 
cognizable, failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law, or exercised a jurisdiction not so vested, 
the District Court may, and if required by a party shall, submit the record to the High Court with a 
statement of its reasons fo r considering the opinion of the Subordinate Court with respect to the nature of 
the suit to be erroneous.  
(2) On receiving th e record and statement the High Court may make such order in the case as it 
thinks fit.  
(3) With respect to any proceedings subseq uent to decree in any case submitted to the High Court 
under this rule, the High Court may make such order as in the circumstance appears to it to be just and 
proper.  
(4) A Court subordinate  to a District Court shall comply with any requisition which the D istrict Court 
may make for any record or information for the purposes of this rule.  
ORDER XLVII  
REVIEW  
1. Application for review of judgment. —(1) Any person considering himself aggrieved —  
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from  which no appeal has been 
preferred , 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or  
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes , 
and who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due 
diligence was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree was 
passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or for any 
other sufficient reason, desires to obt ain a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may 
apply for a review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1951, s. 2.    229 
 (2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or order may apply for a review of judgment 
notwithstandi ng the pendency of an appeal by some other party except where the ground of such appeal is 
common to the applicant and the appellant, or when, being respondent, he can present to the Appellate 
Court the case on which he applied for the review.  
1[Explanatio n.—The fact that the decision on a question of law on which the judgment of the Court is 
based has been reversed or modified by the subsequent decision of a superior Court in any other case, 
shall not be a ground for the review of such judgment.]  
2. [To wh om applications for review may be made .]—Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure 
(Amendment ) Act, 1956 (66 of 1956)  s. 14. 
3. Form of applications for review. —The provisions as to the form of preferring appeals shall 
apply, mutatis mutandis , to applications fo r review.  
4. Application where rejected. —(1) Where it appears to the Court that there is not sufficient ground 
for a review, it shall reject the application.  
(2) Application where granted. —Where  the Court is of opinion that the application for review 
shoul d be granted, it shall grant the same:  
Provided that — 
(a) no such application shall be granted without previous notice to the opposite party, to enable 
him to appear and be heard in support of the decree or order, a review of which is applied for; and  
(b) no such application shall be granted on the ground of discovery of new matter or evidence 
which the applicant alleges was not within his knowledge, or could not be adduced by him when the 
decree or order was passed or made, without strict proof of such all egation.  
5. Application for review in Court consisting of two or more Judges. —Where  the Judge or 
Judges, or any one of the Judges , who passed the decree or made the order a review of which is applied 
for, continues or continued attached to the Court at the  time when the application for a review is 
presented, and is not or not precluded by absence or other cause for a period of six months next after the 
application from considering the decree or order to which the application refers, such Judge or Judges or 
any of them shall hear the application, and no other Judge or Judges of the Court shall hear the same.  
6. Application where rejected. —(1) Where the application for a review is heard by more than one 
Judge and the Court is equally divided, the application s hall be rejected.  
(2) Where there is a majority, the decision shall be according to the opinion of the majority.  
7. Order of rejection not appealable. Objections to order granting application. —2[(1) An order 
of the Court rejecting the application shall not  be appealable; but an order granting an application may be 
objected to at once  by an appeal from the order granting the application or in an appeal from the decree or 
order finally passed or made in the suit.]  
(2) Where the application has been rejected i n consequence of the failure of the applicant to appear , 
he may apply for an order to have the rejected application restored to the file, and, where it is proved to 
the satisfaction of the Court that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing which such 
application was called on for hearing, the Court shall order it to be restored to the file upon such terms as 
to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for hearing the same.  
(3) No order shall be made under sub -rule ( 2) unl ess notice of the application has been served on the 
opposite party.  
8. Registry of application granted, and order for re -hearings. —When  an application for review is 
granted, a note thereof shall be made in the register and the Court may at once re -hear th e case or make 
such order in regard to the re -hearing as it thinks fit.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 92 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 92, for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).    230 
 9. Bar of certain application. —No application to review an order made on an application for a 
review or a decree or order passed or made on a review shall be entertained.  
ORDER XLVIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
1. Process to be served at expense of party issuing. —(1) Every  process issued under this Code shall 
be served at the expense of the party on whose behalf it is issued, unless the Court-otherwise directs.  
(2) Costs of service. —The court -fee ch argeable for such service shall be paid within a time to be 
fixed -before the process is issued.  
2. Orders and notices how served. —All orders, notices and other documents required by this Code to 
be given to or served on any person shall be served in the ma nner provided for the service of summons.  
 
3. Use of forms in appendices. —The Forms given in the appendices, with such variation as the 
circumstances or each case may require, shall be used for the purposes therein mentioned.  
ORDER XLIX  
CHARTERED  HIGH COUR TS 
1. Who may serve processes of High Court. —Notice  to produce documents, summonses to 
witnesses, and every other judical process, issued in the exercise of the original civil jurisdiction of the 
High Court, and of its matrimonial, testamentary and intesta te jurisdictions, except summonses to 
defendants, writs of execution and notices to respondents may be served by the attorneys in the suits, or 
by persons employed by them, or by such other persons as the High Court, by any rule or order, directs.  
2. Savin g in respect of Chartered High Courts. —Nothing  in this Schedule shall be deemed to limit 
or otherwise affect any rules in force at the commencement of this Code for the taking of evidence or the 
recording of judgments and orders by a Chartered High Court.  
3. Application of rules. —The following rules shall not apply to any Chartered High Court in the 
exercise of its ordinary or extraordinary original civil jurisdiction, namely: —  
(1) rule 10 and rule 11, clauses (b) and (c), of Order VII;  
(2) rule 3 of Order  X; 
(3) rule 2 of Order XVI;  
(4) rules 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 , 13, 14, 15 and 16 (so far as relates to the manner of taking evidenc e) of 
Order XVIII ; 
(5) rule 1 to 8 of Order XX; and  
(6) rule 7 of Order XXXIII (so far as relates to the making of a memorandum);  
and rule 35 of Order XLI shall not apply to any such High Court in the exercise of its appellate 
jurisdiction . 
ORDER L  
PROVINCIAL. SMALL  CAUSE COURTS  
1. Provincial Small Cause Courts. —The provisions hereinafter specified shall not extend to Court 
constitu ted under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act 1887 (9 of 1887) 1[or under the Berar Small 
Cause Courts Law , 1905] or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes 2[under the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1941, s. 2, and the Third Sch.  
2. Subs. by s. 2, and the Third Sch. ibid., for “under that Act”.    231 
 said Act or Law] 1[or to Courts in 2[any part of India to wh ich the said Act does not extend] exercising a 
corresponding jurisdiction that is to say — 
(a) so much of this Schedule as relates to —  
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes or the execution of decrees 
in such suits;  
(ii) the exe cution of decrees against immovable property or the interest of a partner in 
partnership property;  
(iii) the settlement of issues; and  
(b) the following rules and orders: —  
Order II, rule 1 (frame of suit) ; 
Order X, rule 3 (record of examination of parties ); 
Order XV,  except so much of rule 4 as provides for the pronouncement at once of 
judgment ; 
Order XVIII, rule 5 to 12 (evidence);  
Order XLI, to XLV (appeals) ; 
Order XLVII, rules 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 (review);  
Order LI.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of the First Schedule. —In the  First Schedule  to the said Code, in the Order L, in rule 1, 
in clause (b) for the words and figures “Order XV, except so much of rule 4 as provides for th e 
pronouncement  at once of judgment”, the words as figures “Order XV, excep t so much of rule 4 as 
provides for the pronouncement at once of judgment and rule 5” shall be substituted . 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 19 of 1973, s. 3]  
 
ORDER LI  
PRESIDENCY  SMALL  CAUSE  COURTS  
1. Presidency Small Cause Courts .—Save as provided in rules 22 and  23 of Order V, rules 4 and 7 
of Order XXI , and rule 4 of Order XXVI, and by the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 
1882), this Schedule shall not extend to any suit or proceeding in any Court of Small Causes established 
in the towns of Calcutt a, Madras and Bombay.  
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951 , s. 18.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956 , for “Part B States”.    232 
 APPENDIX A  
PLEADINGS  
(1) Titles of Suits  
 
IN THE COURT  OF . ...............................................................................................   
A.B. (add description and residence )..................................... ................................................ Plaintiff  
against  
C.D. (add description and residence) .................................................................................... Defendant  
(2) Description of parties in particular Cases  
1[The Unio n of India or the State of…………………….. , as the case may be.]   
           __________________   
The Advocate General of  
The Collector of   
The State of          __________________   
The A. B. Company, Limited having its registered office at   
  
A. B., a public officer of the C. D. Company.  
         ____________________   
A. B. (add description and residence) , on behalf of himself and all other creditors of C. D. late of 
(add description and residence)   
        _________________  
A. B. (add description and residen ce), on behalf of himself and all other holders of debentures 
issued by the Company limited.  
        _________________  
The Official Receiver.    
A. B. a minor (add description and residence), by C. D. [or by the Court of Wards], his next 
friend.   
 
A. B. (ad d description and residence),   a person of unsound mind [or of weak 
mind] , by. C. D. his next friend.  
A. B. a firm carrying on business in partnership at   
A. (add description and residence) , by his constituted attorney C. D. (add description and 
residenc e).      
 
A. B. (add description and residence ),  Shebait of Thakur.  
 
A. B. (add description and residence ), executor of C. D. deceased.  
 
A. B. (add description and residence ), heir of C. D. deceased.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  the A. O. 1950, for “The Secretary of State or the Federation of India or the Province of……………., as the case may 
be”.   233 
 (3) Plaints  
No. 1  
MONEY LENT  
(Title) 
A. B., the abo ve named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the………………………………day of……….. 20……………., he lent the defendant  
……..rupees repayable on the………………………day of…………………………………..  
2. The defendant has not paid the same, except…………..rupees paid on the……….day  
of………… 20…………..  
[If the plaintiff claims exemption from any law of limitation, say :—] 
3. The plaintiff was a minor [or insane] from the…………………..day of…………………… till 
the…………….day of………………….. .  
4. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdict ion.] 
5. The Value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is …….rupees and for 
the purpose of court -fees is………….rupees.  
6. The plaintiff claims…………rupees, with inter est at………………per cent. from the……day of 
…………. 20………….  
 
No. 2  
MONEY  OVERPAID  
(Title) 
A. B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
1. On the………………day of………… .…20……, the plaintiff agreed to buy and the defendant  
agreed to sell…………..bars of silver at…………annas per tola of fine silver.  
2. The plaintiff procured the sa id bars to be assayed by E.F, who was paid by the defendant for such 
assay, and E.F declared each of the bars to contain 1,500 tolas of fine silver, and the plaintiff accordingly 
the defendant………….  rupees.  
3. Each of the said bars contained only 1,200 tola s of fine silver, of which fact the plaintiff was 
ignorant when he made the payment.  
4. The defendant has not repaid the sum so overpaid.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ]  
No. 3  
GOODS SOLD AT A FIXED PRICE AND DELIVERED  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: —   
1. On the………………day of………… 20……., E. F. sold and delivered to the defendant [one 
hundred barrels of flour, or the goods mentioned in the schedule hereto annexed. or sundry goods.]  
2. The defendant promised  to pay………….. rupees for the said goods on delivery [ or on the………  
day of…………. some day before the plaint was filed ]. 
3. He has not paid the same.  
4. E. F . died on the……………day of .....20 ………By his last will he appointed his brother, the 
plaintiff , his executor . 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, ] 
  7. The plaintiff as executor of E.F. claims [Relief Claimed ].   234 
 No. 4  
GOODS SOLD AT A REASONABLE PRICE AND DELIVERED  
(Title) 
A. B.,  the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the…………..day of…………..…… 20………, p laintiff sold and delivered to the defendant  
[sundry articles of house -furniture], but no express agreement was made as to the price.  
2. The goods were reasonably worth  ………….. rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No . 1, and relief claimed ] 
No. 5  
GOODS MADE AT DEPENDANT ’S REQUEST, AND NOT ACCEPTED  
(Title) 
A. B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
1. On the………….day of………….… 20……….., E.F. agreed with the plaintiff that the  
plaintiff should make for him [ six tables and fifty chairs ] and that E.F should pay for the goods on 
delivery……….  rupees.  
2. The plaintiff made the goods, and on the…………….day of…………… 20……….  , offered  to  
deliver them to E.F., and has ever since been ready and willing so to do.  
3. E.F. has n ot accepted the goods or paid for them.  
[As in paras . 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed .] 
No. 6  
DEFICIENCY UPON A RE -SALE [GOODS SOLD AT AUCTION ] 
(Title) 
A. B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the………….day of…………. …20………..,  the plaintiff put up at auction sundry [goods] ,  
subject to the condition that all goods not paid for and removed by the purchaser within [ ten days ] after 
the sale should be re -sold by auction on his account, of which condition the defendant had notice.  
2. The  defendant purchased [ one crate of crockery ] at the auction at the price of……  rupees.  
3. The plaintiff was ready and willing to deliver the goods to the defendant on the date of the sale and 
for [ten days ] after.  
4. The defenant did not take away the goods  purchased by him, nor pay for them within [ ten days ] 
after the sale, nor afterwards.  
5. On the……………day of………… 20……, the plaintiff re -sold the [ crate of crockery ], 
on account of the defendant, by public auction, for………..rupees.  
6. The expenses attendant upo n such re -sale amounted to……..rupees.  
7. The defendant has not paid the deficiency thus arising, amounting to rupees.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. I, and Relief claimed. ]    235 
 No. 7  
SERVICES AT A REASONABLE RATE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above named plaintiff, s tates as follows: —  
1. Between the…………….  day of…………….…… 20……….  , and the………  day of…………  
…… 20…… at……………,  plaintiff  [executed sundry drawings, designs and diagrams ] for the defendant,  
at his request; but no express agreement was made as to the sum to be paid for such services.  
2. The services were reasonably worth………rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
  [As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 8  
SERVICES AND MATERIALS AT A REASONABLE COST  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above named plaintif f, states as follows: —  
1. On the……………day of……………..… 20………,  at…………….  the plaintiff built a house 
[known as No. ………………, in…..], and furnished the materials therefor, for the defendant, at his 
request, but no express agreement was made as to the amount to be paid for such work and materials.  
2. The work done and materials supplied were reasonably worth……  rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 9  
USE AND  OCCUPATION  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, executor of the will of X. Y.,  deceased, states as follows: — 
1. That the defendant occupied the [house No……....,……....…..Street], by permission of the said  
X.Y, from the…….day of………………..… 20….............  , until the day of…………… 20.…. , and no 
agreement  was made as to payment for the use of the said premises.  
2. That the use of the said premises for the said period was reasonably worth  rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. I. ] 
4. The plaintiff as exec utor of X Y, claims [ relief claimed ]. 
No. 10  
ON AN AWARD  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the…….day of……….… 20…, the plaintiff and defendant, having a difference between  
them concerning [a demand of the plaintiff for the price of ten barrels of oil which the defendant refused 
to pay]; agreed in writing to submit the difference to the arbitration of E. F and G. H. and the original 
document is annexed hereto.  
2. On the………….  ….day of…………………… 20….., the arbitrators awarded that  the defendant  
should  [pay the plaintiff  rupees].  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and relief c laimed. ]   236 
 No. 11  
ON A FOREIGN JUDGMENT  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the…………day  of………… 20……., at…….in the State [or Kingdom] of….., the…..  
Court of that State [or Kingdom,] in a suit therein pending between the plaintiff and the defendant, duly 
adjudged that the defendant should pay to the plaintiff…………………………rupees, with interest from   
the said date.  
2. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 12  
AGAINST SURETY FOR PAYMENT OF RENT  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
1. On the………..day of…………… 20..., E. F. hired from the plaintiff for the term of……..years, the 
[house No……………., ………………street], at the annual rent of………rupees, payable [monthly].  
2. The defendant agreed, in consideration of the letting of the premises to E.F, to gurantee the 
punctual payment o f the rent.  
3. The rent for the month of  ………. 20……….., amounting to………………………..rupees, has not  
been paid.  
[If, by the terms of the agreement, notice is required to be given to the surety, add: —] 
4. On the………………….day of…………..  19…….., the plaintiff gave notic e to the defendant of the  
non-payment of the rent, and demanded payment thereof.  
5. The defendant has not paid the same.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. I, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 13  
BREACH OF AGREEMENT TO PURCHASE LAND  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named p laintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the…………….day of……… 20…..., the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, and 
the Original document is hereto annexed.  
[Or, on the…………day of……………… 20…….., the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that 
the plaint iff should sell to the defendant and that the defendant should purchase from the plaintiff forty  bighas 
of land in the village of……….for…….  rupees.]  
2. On the………….  day of…………. …… 20..….., the plaintiff, being then the absolute owner of the 
property [and the same being free from all incumbrances, as was made to appear to the defendant], tendered to 
the defendant a sufficient instrument of transfer of the same [ or, was ready and willing, and is still ready and 
willing, and offered, to transfer the same to the d efendant by a sufficient instrument] on the payment by the 
defendant of the money agreed upon.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. I, and relief claimed. ] 
   237 
 No. 14  
NOT DELIVERING GOODS SOLD  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the……………day of……… …20 ….., the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
defendant should deliver [one hundred barrels of flour] to the plaintiff on the…………..day 
of……........ …20 ..…..., and that the plaintiff sho uld pay there  for……..  rupees on delivery.  
2. On the [said] day the plaintiff was ready and willing, and offered, to pay the defendant the said sum 
upon delivery of the goods.  
3. The defendant has not delivered the goods, and the plaintiff has been deprive d of the profits which 
would have accrued to him from such delivery.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 15  
WRONGFUL  DISMISSAL   
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
1. On the……………day of………… 20...….., the p laintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
plaintiff should serve the defendant as [an accountant, or in the capacity of foreman, or as the case may 
be], and that the defendant should employ the plaintiff as such for the term of [one year] and pay him  for 
his services……… rupees [monthly].  
2. On the…………..  day of……….…… 20..…..., the plaintiff entered upon the service of the defendant  
and has ever since been, and still is, ready and willing to continue in such service during the remainder of 
the said year w hereof the defendant always has had notice.  
3. On the…….day of………. .…… 20...….., the defendant wrongfully discharged the plaintiff, and  
refused to permit him to serve as aforesaid, or to pay him for his services.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and rel ief claimed. ] 
 
No. 16  
BREACH OF CONTRACT TO SERVE  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
1. On the………day of……….…… 20……, the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
plaintiff should employ the defendant at as [annual] salary of…..rupees, and that the defendant should 
serve the plaintiff as [an artist] for the term of [one year].  
2. The plaintiff has always been ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement [and on the day 
of…….……. 20… ..…., offered so to do].  
3. The def endant (entered upon) the service of the plaintiff on the above -mentioned day, but afterwards, 
on the……….day of……….…… 20..…… , he refused to serve the plaintiff as aforesaid.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
   238 
 No. 17  
AGAINST A BUILDER  FOR DEFECTIVE WORKMANSHIP  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
1. On the………….day of……….…… 20….., the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, 
and the original document is hereto annexed. [ Or state the tenor of the contra ct.] 
[2. The plaintiff duly performed all the conditions of the agreement on his part.]  
3. The defendant [built the house referred to in the agreement in a bad and unworkman  like manner].  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 18  
ON A BOND FOR THE FIDELITY OF A CLERK  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
1. On the………day of……..…… 20…......... , the plaintiff took E.F. into his employment as a clerk.  
2. In consideration thereof, on the………day of…….…… 20………,  the def endant agreed with plaintiff 
that if E.F. should not faithfully perform his duties as a clerk to the plaintiff, or should fail to account to the 
plaintiff for all monies, evidences of debt or other property received by him for the use of the plaintiff, the  
defendant would pay to the plaintiff whatever loss he might sustain by reason thereof, not 
exceeding…rupees.  
[Or, 2. In consideration thereof, the defendant by his bond of the same date bound himself to pay the 
plaintiff the penal sum of………rupees, subject s to the condition that if E.F. should faithfully  
perform his duties as clerk and cashier to the plaintiff and should justly account to the plaintiff for all 
monies, evidences of debt or other property which should be at any time held by him in trust for the 
plaintiff, the bond should be void.]  
[Or 2. In consideration thereof, on the same date the defendant executed a bond in favour of the 
plaintiff, and the original document is hereto annexed.]  
3. Between the………..day  of………..… 20...….., and the…………………..day  of ……… 20...... , 
E.F. received money and other property, amounting to the value of……….rupees, for the use of the 
plaintiff, for which sum he has not accounted to him, and the same still remains due and unpaid.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relie f claimed. ] 
No. 19  
BY TENANT AGAINST LANDLORD, WITH SPECIAL DAMAGE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the……day of……… 20..…., the defendant, by a registered instrument, let to the plaintiff [the 
house No……..Street] for the te rm of……..years, contracting with the plaintiff, that he,  
the plaintiff, and his legal representatives should quietly enjoy possession thereof for the said term.  
2. All conditions were fulfilled and all things happened necessary to entitle the plaintiff to  maintain 
this suit.  
3. On the…………day of………… .20...…., during the said term, E.F. who was the lawful owner of 
the said house, lawfully evicted the plaintiff therefrom, and still withholds the possession thereof from 
him. 
4. The plaintiff was thereby [preven ted from continuing the business of a tailor at the said place, was 
compelled to expend……..rupees in moving, and lost the custom of G.H. and I.J by such removal].  
        [As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ]   239 
 No. 20  
ON AN AGREEMENT OF  INDEMNITY  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the..............day of....................... 20.…. ., the plaintiff and defendant, being partners in trade 
under  the style of A. B. and C.D., dissolved the partnership, and mutu ally agreed that the defendant 
should take and keep all the partnership property, pay all debts of the firm and indemnify the plaintiff 
against all claims that might be made upon him on account of any indebtedness of the firm.  
2. The plaintiff duly perform ed all the conditions of the agreement on his part.  
3. On the.............. day  of..................... 20....….., [a judgment was recovered against the plaintiff  
and defendant  by E.F., in the High Court of Judicature at......., upon a debt due from the fir m to E.F., 
and on the day  of................. 20.…., ] the plaintiff paid.........rupees [in satisfaction of the same].  
4. The defendant has not paid the same to the plaintiff.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No.  1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 21  
PROCURING PROPER TY BY FRAUD  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the  ...............  day of  ...........  .......20.…. , the defendant, for the purpose of in ducing the 
plaintiff to  sell him certain goods, represented to the plaintiff that [he, the defendant, was solvent, and 
worth............rupees over all his liabilities].  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell [and deliver] to the defendant, [dry goods] of the 
value  of ........................  rupees.  
3. The said representations were false [ or state the particular falsehoods ] and were the n known 
by the defendant to be so.  
4. The defendant has not paid for the goods, [ Or, if the goods were not delivered. ] The 
plaintiff, in  preparing and shipping the goods and procuring their restoration, 
expended .............. rupees.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 o f Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 22  
FRAUDULENTLY PROCURING CREDIT TO BE GIVEN TO ANOTHER PERSON  
  (Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the..........day of................. 20.....…., the defendant, represented to the pla intiff that E.F., was 
solvent and in good credit, and worth ................ rupees over all his liabilities [or that E.F, then held a 
responsible  
situation and was in good circumstances, and might safely be trusted with goods on credit].  
2. The plaintiff w as thereby induced to sell to E.F., (rice) of the value of........  rupees  [on.........months 
credit].  
3. The said representations were false and were then known by the defendant to be so, and were made 
by him with intent to deceive and defraud the plaintif f [or to deceive and injure the plaintiff].  
4. E.F, [did not pay for the said goods at the expiration of the credit aforesaid, or] has not paid for the 
said rice, and the plaintiff has wholly lost the same.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief c laimed .]    240 
 No. 23  
POLLUTING THE WATER UNDER THE PLAINTIFF' S LAND  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. The plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of certain lands 
called .......... and situate in.... .......and of a well therein, and of water in the well, and was entitled to the 
use and benefit of the well and of the water therein, and to have certain springs and streams of water 
which flowed and ran into the well to supply the same to flow or run with out being fouled or polluted.  
2. On the...........  day of ............ 20.........., the defendant wrongfully fouled and polluted the  
well and the water therein and the springs and streams of water which flowed into the well.  
3. In consequence the water in  the well became impure and unfit for domestic and other necessary 
purposes, and the plaintiff and his family are deprived of the use and benefit of the well and water.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No.  1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 24  
CARRYING ON A NOXIOUS MANUFACTURE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. The plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of certain lands 
called.......... situate in...................  
2. Ever since the..................  day of.................... 20....., the defendant has wrongfully caused to  
issue from certain smelting works carried on by the defendant large quantities of offensive and 
unwholesome smoke and other vap ours and noxious matter, which spread themselves over and u pon 
the said lands, and corrupted the air, and settled on the surface of the lands.  
3. Thereby the trees, hedges, herbage and crops of the plaintiff growing on the lands were 
damaged and deteriorated in value, and the cattle and live -stocks of the plaintif f on the lands became 
unhealthy, and many of them were poisoned and died.  
4. The plaintiff was unable to graze the lands with cattle and sheep as he otherwise might have 
done, and was obliged to remove his cattle, sheep and farming stock therefrom, and has  been 
prevented from having so beneficial and healthy a use and occupation of the lands as he otherwise 
would have had.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 25  
OBSTRUCTING A RIGHT OF WAY  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, st ates as follows: — 
1. The plaintiff is, and at the time hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of [a house in the 
village  of ................  ]. 
2. He was entitled to a right of way from the [house] over a certain field to a public highway and 
back again from  the highway over the field to the house, for himself and his servants [with vehicles, 
or on foot] at all times of the year.  
3. On the................day of....................... 20..........,  defendant wrongfully obstructed the said way, 
so that the plain tiff could not pass [with vehicles, or on foot, or in any manner] along the way [and 
has ever since wrongfully obstructed the same].  
4. (State special damage, if any ). 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
   241 
 No. 26  
OBSTRUCTING A HIGHWAY  
(Title) 
1. The defendant wrongfully dug a trench and heaped up earth and stones in the public highway 
leading  from..................  to.........  so as to obstruct it.  
2. Thereby the plaintiff, while lawfully passing along the said highway, fell over the s aid earth and 
stones, [ or into the said trench] and broke his arm, and suffered great pain, and was prevented from 
attending to his business for a long time, and incurred expense for medical attendance.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claim ed.] 
No. 27  
DIVERTING A WATER -COURSE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. The plaintiff is, and at the time hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of a mill situated on a 
[stream]  known as the.........  , in the village of......... .. , district of..........  
2. By reason of such possession the plaintiff was entitled to the flow of the stream for working 
the mill.  
3. On the.......................  day of................ 20......, the defendant, by cutting the bank of the stream, 
wrongfu lly diverted the water thereof, so that less water ran into the plaintiff ’s mill.  
4. By reason thereof the plaintiff has been unable to grind more than.......  sacks per day, whereas,  
before the said diversion of water, he was able to grind......sacks per d ay. 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 28  
OBSTRUCTING A RIGHT TO USE WATER FOR IRRIGATION  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. The plaintiff is, and was at the times hereinafter mentioned was, possesse d of certain lands 
situate, etc., and entitled to take and use a portion of the water of a certain stream for irrigating the 
said lands.  
2. On the.................day of....................... 20.........., the defendant prevented the plaintiff from 
taking and using the said portion of the said water as aforesaid, by wrongfully obstructing and 
diverting the said stream.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No.  1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 29  
INJURIES CAUSED BY NEGLIGENCE ON A RAILROAD  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the  ............  day of .............20........., the defendants were common carriers of passengers by  
railway between  ....... ...... and ...................   
2. On that day the plaintiff was a passenger in one of the carriages of the defendants on the said 
railway.  
3. While he was such passenger, at...............  [or near the station of.................  or between the 
stations of  ...................  and ..................  ], a collision occurred on the said railway caused by the negligence and 
unskilfulness of the defendants’ servants, whereby the  plaintiff was much injured [having his leg broken, his 
head cut, etc., and state the special damage, if any, as ], and incurred expense for medical attendance and is 
permanently disabled from carrying  on his former business as [a salesman].  
[As in paras. 4  and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ]   242 
 [Or thus: —2. On that day the defendants by their servants so negligently and unskillfully drove and 
managed an engine and a train of carriages attached thereto upon and along the defendant’s railway which 
the plai ntiff was then lawfully crossing that the said engine and train were driven and struck against the 
plaintiff, whereby, etc., as in para. 3]. 
No. 30  
INJURIES CAUSED IN NEGLIGENT DRIVING  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. The pl aintiff is a shoemaker, carrying on business at ………… the defendant is a merchant               
of  …………………… .  
2. On the …………. day of ………………… 20………, the plaintiff was walking southward along 
Chowringhee, in the City of Calcutta, at about 3 o’clock in the aft ernoon. He was obliged to cross 
Middleton Street, which is a street running into Chowringhee at right angles. While he was crossing this 
street, and just before he could reach the foot pavement on the further side thereof, a carriage of the 
defendant's, dr awn by two horses under the charge and control of the defendant's servants, was 
negligently, suddenly and without any warning turned at a rapid and dangerous pace out of Middleton 
Street into Chowringhee. The pole of the carriage struck the plaintiff and k nocked him down, and he was 
much trampled by the horses.  
3. By the blow and fall and trampling the plaintiff ’s left arm was broken and he was bruised and 
injured on the side and back, as well as internally, and in consequence thereof the plaintiff was for four 
months ill and in suffering, and unable to attend to his business, and incurred heavy medical and other 
expenses, and sustained great loss of business and profits.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 31  
FOR MALICIOUS  PROSECUT ION 
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
1. On the ………….. day of ………………..… 20.....……, the defendant obtained a warrant of arrest 
from …….…… [a Magistrate of the said city, or as the case may be ] on a charge of …….…, and the 
plainti ff was arrested thereon, and imprisoned for ……………. [days, or hours, and gave bail in the sum 
of …………… rupees to obtain his release].  
2. In so doing the defendant acted maliciously and without reasonable or probable cause.  
3. On the …………….. day of ………………. 20……., the Magistrate dismissed the complaint of the 
defendant and acquitted the plaintiff.  
4. Many persons, whose names ar e unknown to the plaintiff, hearing of the arrest, and supposing the 
plaintiff to be a criminal, have ceased to do business with him; or in consequence of the said arrest, the 
plaintiff lost his situation as clerk to one E.F.; or in consequence the plaintiff suffered pain of body and 
mind, and was prevented transacting his business, and was injured in his credit, and incurred expense in 
obtaining his release from the said imprisonment and in defending himself against the said complaint.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed ].243 No. 32  
MOVABLES WRONGFULLY DETAINED  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the …………….. day of …………… 20…...…, plaintiff owned [ or state facts showing a right 
to the possession ] the goods mentioned in the schedule hereto annexed [ or describe the goods, ] the 
estimated value of which is ………………. rupees.  
2. From that day until th e commencement of this suit the defendant has detained the same from 
the plaintiff  
3. Before the commencement of the suit, to wit, on the …………….. day of………. 20 ……….., the 
plaintiff demanded the same from the defendant, but he refused to deliver them.  
[As in  Paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1. ] 
6. The plaintiff claims —  
(1) delivery of the said goods, or  ...........  rupees, in case delivery cannot be had;  
(2) ................. rupees compensation for the detention thereof.  
No. 33  
AGAINST A  FRAUDULENT PURCHARER AND H IS TRANSFEREE WITH NOTICE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the …………... day of ….……..…… 20……., the defendant C.D., for the purpose of including 
the plaintiff to sell him certain goods, represented to the plaintiff that [he was solvent, and worth ……… 
rupees over all his liabilities].  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell and deliver to C.D. [one hundred boxes of tea], the 
estimated value of which is ……………… rupees.  
3. The said representations were fal se, and were then k nown by C.D. to be so [ or at the time of 
making the said representations, C.D. was insolvent, and knew himself to be so].  
4. C.D. afterwards transferred the said goods to the defendant E.F. without consideration [ or who had 
notice of the falsity of the rep resentation].  
5. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdiction. ] 
6. The value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is ………….. rupees and 
for the purpose of court -fees is ………….. rupees.  
7. The plaintiff claims —  
(1) delivery of the said goods, or   ………………. rupees, in case delivery cannot be had;  
(2) ……………….. rupees compensation for the detention thereof.  
No. 34  
RESCISSION OF A CONTRACT ON THE GROUND OF MISTAKE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plain tiff, states as follows: —   
1. On the ……………. day of ……………………… 20……….. , the defendant represented to the 
plaintiff that a certain piece of ground belonging to the defendant, situated at ……………., contained [ten 
bighas].  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to  purchase the same at the price of ……………….rupees in the 
belief that the said representation was true, and signed an agreement, of which the original is hereto 
annexed. But the land has not been transferred to him.  
3. On the …………….. day of ……………………… 20………, t he plaintiff paid the defendant 
rupees as part of the purchase money.   244 4. That the said piece of ground contained in fact only [five bighas].  
5. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdiction. ] 
6. The value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is.............  rupees and for 
the purpose of court -fees is...................rupees.  
7. The plaintiff claims — 
(1)  ..............  rupees, with interest from the  .............  day of ...............  20..........   . 
(2) that the said agreement be del ivered up and cancelled.  
No. 35  
AN INJUNCTION RESTRAINING WASTE  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff states as follows: — 
1. The plaintiff is the absolute owner of [ describe the property ]. 
2. The defendant is in possession of the same under a lease from  the plaintiff.  
3.  The defendant has [cut down a number of valuable trees, and threatens to cut down many more for the 
purpose of sale] without the consent of the plaintiff.  
4. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdict ion.] 
5. The value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is ..........  rupees and for the 
purpose of court -fees is ...........  rupees.  
6. The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from committing or permi tting any 
further waste on the said premises.  
[Pecuniary compensation may also be claimed. ] 
No. 36  
INJUNCTION RESTRAINING NUISANCE  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. Plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned wa s, the absolute owner of [the house 
No..................... Street, Calcutta].  
2. The defendant is, and at all the said times was, the absolute owner of [a plot of ground in the same  
street................] . 
 3. On the  ................  day of ............... 20.......... , the defendant erected upon his said plot a  slaughter - 
house, and still maintains the same; and from that day until the present time has continually caused cattle to 
be brought and killed there [and has caused the blood and offal to be thrown into the street opposite the said 
house of the plaintiff].  
[4. In consequence the plaintiff has been compelled to abandon the said house, and has been unable to 
rent the same.]  
5. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdiction. ] 
6. The v alue of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is  rupees and for the   
purpose of court -fees is ........... rupees.  
7. The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from committing or permitting any  
further nuisan ce. 
No. 37  
PUBLIC NUISANCE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. The defendant has wrongly heaped up earth and stones on a public road known as ............... Street  
at........... so as to obstruct the passage of the public along t he same and threatens and intends, unless  
restrained from so doing, to continue and repeat the said wrongful act.  
1[*2. The plaintiff has obtained the leave of the Court for the institution of this suit. ]
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 93, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*Not applicable  where suit is instituted by the Advocate -General . 245 [As in paras . 4 and 5 of Form No . 1] 
5. The plainti ff claims — 
(1) a declaration that the defendant is not entitled to obstruct the passage of the public along the 
said road;  
(2) an injunction restraining the defendant from obstructing the passage of the public along the 
said public road and directing the d efendant to remove the earth and stones wrongfully heaped up as 
aforesaid.  
No. 38  
INJUNCTION AGAINST THE DIVERSION OF A WATER -COURSE  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: —  
[As in form No. 27.] 
The plaintiff claims that the defendant  be restrained by injunction from diverting the water as aforesaid.  
No. 39  
RESTORATION OF MOVABLE PROPERTY THREATENED WITH DESTRUCTION AND FOR AN INJUNCTION  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. Plaintiff is, and at all times herein after mentioned was, the owner of [a portrait of his grandfather 
which was executed by an eminent painter], and of which no duplicate exists [ or state any facts 
showing that the property is of a kind that cannot be replaced by money ]. 
2. On the..............  day of............... 20......, he deposited the same for the safe -keeping with the  
defendant.  
3. On the...............  day of............... 20......, he demanded the same from the defendant and offered  
to pay all reasonable charges for the storage of the sa me. 
4. The defendant refuses to deliver the same to the plaintiff and threatens to conceal, dispose of, cut 
or injure the same if required to deliver it up.  
5. No pecuniary compensation would be an adequate compensation to the plaintiff for the loss of the 
[pain ting] . 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No . 1. ] 
8. The plaintiff claims —  
(1) that the defendant be restrained by injunction from disposing of, injuring or concealing the 
said [painting],  
(2) that he be compelled to deliver the same to the plaintiff.  
No. 40  
INTERPLEADER  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. Before the date of the claims hereinafter mentioned G.H. deposited with the plaintiff [describe the 
property ] for [safe -keeping].  
2. The defendant C.D. claims the same [under an alleged assignment thereof to him from G.H. ].  
3. defendant E. F. also claims the same  [under  an order of G.H. transferring the same to him.]  
4. The plaintiff is ignorant of the respective rights of the defendants.  
5. He has no claim upon the said propert y other than for charges and costs, and is ready and willing to  
deliver it to such persons as the Court shall direct.  
 246 6. The suit is not brought by collusion with either of the defendants.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
9. The plaintiff claims — 
(1) that the defendants be restrained, by injunction, from taking any proceedings against the 
plaintiff in relation thereto;  
(2) that they be required to interplead together concerning their claims to the said property;  
[(3) that some person be authorised t o receive the said property pending such litigation;]  
(4) that upon delivering the same to such [person] the plaintiff be discharged from all liability to 
either of the defendants in relation thereto.  
No. 41  
ADMINISTRATION BY CREDITOR ON BEHALF OF HIMSELF AND ALL OTHER CREDITORS  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. E.F. late of.................  , was at the time of his death, and his estate still is, indebted to the 
plaintiff in the  sum of.......................  [here insert natu re of debt and security, if  any]. 
2. E.F. died on or about the...........................  day of............... ........ By his last will, dated the...........  
day of.............he appointed C.D. his executor  [ or devised his estate in trust, etc., or died intestate, as 
the case  may be]. 
3. The will was proved by C.D. [or letters of administration were granted, etc.].  
4. The defendant has possessed himself of the movable [and immovable], or the proceeds of the 
immovable property of E.F. and has not paid the plaintiff his debt.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1. ] 
7. The plaintiff claims that an account may be taken of the movable [and immovable] property of 
E.F., deceased, and that the same may be administered under the decree of the Court.  
No. 42  
ADMINISTR ATION BY SPECIFIC LEGATEE  
(Title)  
[Alter Form No. 41 thus] 
[Omit paragraph 1 and commence paragraph 2] E.F. late of  ..... , died on or about the ..........................  
day of  ......................  By his last will, dated the  ...................  day of ........  he appointed C.D., his executor, 
and bequeathed to the plaintiff [ here state the specific legacy ]. 
For paragraph 4 substitute — 
The defendant is in possession of the movable property of E.F., and, amongst other things, of the 
said [ here name the subject of the specific bequest ]. 
For the commen cement of paragraph 7 substitute —  
The plaintiff claims that the defendant may be ordered to deliver to him the said [ here name the 
subject of the specific bequest ], or that, etc.  
 
 247 No. 43  
ADMINISTRATION BY PECUNIARY LEGATEE  
(Title)  
[Alter Form No. 41 thus] 
[Omit paragraph 1 and substitute for paragraph 2] E.F, late of..........  ........................ , died on or about  
the ..............  day of  ................................ ...............  By his last will, dated the ...........................................day  
of......................  he appointed C.D. his execu tor, and bequeathed to the plaintiff a legacy of............
 rupees.  
   In paragraph 4 substitute “legacy ” for “debt” 
Another form  
(Title) 
E. F, the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. A. B. of K. in the ………………… died on the …………….  Day of….………….……b y his last will,  
dated the...........  day of............... , he appointed the defendant and M.N. [who died in the testator ’s lifetime] 
his executors, and bequeathed his property, whether movable or immovable, to his executors in  trust, to 
pay the rents and income thereof to the plaintiff for his life; and after his decease, and in default of his 
having a son who should attain twenty -one, or a daughter who should attain that age or marry, upon trust 
as to his immovable property for the person who would be the  testator's heir -at-law, and as to his movable 
property for the persons who would be the testator ’s next -of-kin if he had died intestate at the time of the 
death of the plaintiff and such failure of his issue as aforesaid.  
2. The will was proved by the def endant on the...............................day  of........................The plaintiff 
has not  been married.  
3. The testator was at his death entitled to movable and immovable property; the defendant entered 
into the receipt of the rents of the immovable property and got in the movable property; he has sold some 
part of the immovable property . 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1. ] 
6. The plaintiff claims —  
 (1) to have a movable and immovable property of A. B. administered in this Court, and for that 
purpo se to have all proper directions given and account s taken;  
(2) such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require.  
No. 44 
EXECUTION OF TRUSTS  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. He is one of the trustees under a n instrument of settlement  bearing date on or about 
the... .............. day of.............................  made upon the marriage of E.E. and G.H., the father and mother 
of the defendant [ or an instrument of transfer of the estate and effects of E.F. for the benefit of C.D., the 
defendant, and the other creditors of E.F.]. 
2. A.B. has taken upon himself the burden of the said trust, and is in possession of [ or of the proceeds 
of] the movable and immovable property transferred by the said instrument.  
 3. C.D. claims to be entitled to a beneficial interest under the instrument.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1. ] 
 248  
6. The plaintiff is desirous to account for all the rents and profits of the said immovable property [and 
the proceeds of the sale of the said,  or of part of the said, immovable property, or movable, or the proceeds 
of the sale of, or of part of, the said movable property, or the profits occurring to the plaintiff as such trustee 
in the execution of the said trust]; and he prays that the Court wi ll take the accounts of the said trust, and 
also that the whole of the said trust estate may be administered in the Court for the benefit of C.D., the 
defendant, and all other persons who may be interested in such administration, in the presence of C.D. and 
such other persons so interested as the Court may direct, or that C.D. may show good cause to the contrary.  
[N.B.—Where the suit is by a beneficiary, the plaint may be mode lled mutatis mutandis on the plaint 
by a legatee. ] 
No. 45  
FORECLOSURE OR SALE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. The plaintiff is mortgagee of lands belonging to the defendant.  
2. The following are the particulars of the mortgage: — 
(a) (date);  
(b) (names of mortgagor and mortgagee);  
(c) (sum secured);  
(d) (rate of interest);  
(e) (Property subject to mortgage);  
(f) (amount now due ); 
(g) (if the plaintiff's title is derivative, state shortly the transfers or devolution under 
which he claims).  
(If the plaintiff is mortgagee in possession add).  
3. The plaintiff took possession of the mortgaged property on the ......... day of ........................  and is 
ready to  account as mortgagee in possession from that time.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 11  
6. The plaintiff claims — 
(1) payment, or in default [sale or] foreclosure [and possession];  
  [Where Order 34, rule 6, applies. ] 
(2) in case the proceeds of the sale are found to be insufficient to pay the amount due to the 
plaintiff then that liberty be reserved to the plaintiff to apply for  1[an order for the bala nce].  
No. 46  
REDEMPTION  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. The plaintiff is mortgagor of lands of which the defendant is mortgagee.  
2. The following are the particulars of the mortgage: — 
(a) (date);  
(b) (names of mortgagor and  mortgagee);  
(c) (sum secured);  
(d) (rate of interest);  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 s. 93, for “a decree for the balance ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
 249 (e) (property subject to mortgage);  
(f) (If the plaintiff ’s title is derivative, state shortly the transfers or devolution under which he 
claims).  
(If the defendant is mortgagee in possession, add ) 
3. The defendant has taken possession [or has received the rents] of the mortgaged property.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 .] 
6. The plaintiff claims to redeem the said property and to have the same reconveyed to him [and 
to have possession thereof]. 1[together with  mesne  profits].  
No. 47  
SPECIFIC  PERFORMANCE  (No. 1)  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. By an agreement dated the ...........  day of ................  and signed by the defendant, he contracted to  
buy of [ or sell to ] the plaintiff certain immovable property therein described and deferred to,  for the sum  
of........................ rupees.  
2. The plaintiff has applied to the defendant specifically to perform the agreement on his part, but the 
defendant has not done so.  
3. The plaintiff has been and still is ready and willing specifically to perform the agreement on his 
part of which the defendant has had notice.  
[As in paras . 4 and 5 of Form No . 1.] 
6. The plaintiff claims that the Court will order the defendant specifi cally to perform the agreement 
and to  do all acts necessary to put the plaintiff in full possession of the said property [ or to accept a 
transfer and possession of the said property] and to pay the costs of the suit.  
No. 48  
SPECIFIC  PERFORMANCE  (No. 2)  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. On the..............day of.............. 20............, the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, in 
writing, and the original document is hereto annexed.  
The defendant was absolute ly entitled to the immovable property described in the agreement.  
2. On the...........day of............... 20............ , the plaintiff tendered rupees to the defendant, and  
demanded a transfer of the said property by a sufficient instrument.  
3. On the .......... day of ..................20.......... , the plaintiff again demanded such transfer. [ Or the  
defendant refused to transfer the same to the plaintiff.]  
4. The defendant has not executed any instrument of transfer.  
5. The plaintiff is still ready and w illing to pay the purchase -money of the said property to the 
defendant.  
[As in paras.  4 and 5 of Form No . 1.] 
8. The plaintiff claims — 
(1) that the defendant transfers the said property to the plaintiff by a sufficient instrument 
[following the terms of th e agreement ]; 
(2)……………. rupees compensation for withholding the same.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 93 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  250 No. 49  
PARTNERSHIP  
(Title) 
A.B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: — 
1. He and C.D., the defend ant, have been for...................... years [or months] past carrying on bus iness  
together under articles of partnership in writing [ or under a deed, or under a verbal agreement].  
2. Several disputes and differences have arisen between the plaintiff and defendant as such partners whereby 
it has become impossible to carry on the bu siness in partnership with advantage to the partners, [ Or the defendant 
has committed the following breaches  of the partnership articles: — 
 
(1)  
(2) 
(3)     .] 
 
[As in paras .  4 and  5 of Form No. 1. ] 
5. The plaintiff claims — 
(1) dissolution of the partner ship; 
(2) that accounts be taken;  
(3) that a receiver be appointed . 
(N.B.—In suits for the winding -up of any partnership, omit the claim for dissolution; and instead insert  a 
paragraph stating the fact s of the  partnership having been dissolved ). 
(4) WRITTE N STATEMENTS  
General  Defences  
 
Denial —The defendant denies that ( set out facts ).  
The defendant does not admit that ( set out facts ). 
The defendant admits that………………but says that……………  
The defendant denies that he is a partner in the defendant firm of………………… … 
Protest —The defendant denies that he made the contract alleged or any contract with the plaintiff.                                             
The defendant denies that he contracted with the plaintiff  as alleged or at all.  
The defendant admits assets bu t not the plaintiff ’s claim.  
The defendant denies  that the plaintiff sold to him the goods mentioned in the plaintiff or any of them.  
Limitation —The suit is barred by article.....................................or article...............of the Second 
Sched ule to the  Indian1 Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877).  
Jurisdiction —The Court has no jurisdiction to hear the suit on the ground that ( set forth the grounds ). 
On the  ................................ ................................ ........................ day of  .......................  a diamond ring was delivered 
by the defendant to  and accepted by the plaintiff in di scharge of the alleged cause of action.  
Insolvency —The defendant has been adjudged an insolvent.  
The plaintiff before the institution of the suit was adjudged an insolvent and the right to sue vested in 
the receiver.  
Minority —The defendant was a minor at t he time of making the alleged contract.  
                                                      
1. See now the Limitation Act, 19 63 (36 of 19 63). 251 Payment into Court —The defendant as to the whole claim (or as to Rs..........part of the money claimed, or 
as the case may be) has paid into Court Rs................................and says that this sum is enough to  satisfy 
the plaintiff's claim (or the part aforesaid).  
Performance remitted —The performance of the promise alleged was remitted on the date).  
Rescission —The contract was rescinded by agreement between the plaintiff and defendant.  
Res judicata —The plaintif f's claim is barred by the decree in suit (give the reference).  
Estoppel —The plaintiff is estopped from denying the truth of (insert statement as to which estoppel 
is claimed) because (here state the facts relied on as creating the estoppel).  
Ground of def ence subsequent to institution of suit —Since the institution of the suit,  that is to 
say, on the......................  day of..................................  (set out  facts).  
No. 1  
DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR GOODS SOL D AND DELIVERED  
1. The defendant did not or der the goods.  
2. The goods were not delivered to the defendant.  
3. The price was not Rs.  
[or] 
4.   1. 
5.    Except as to Rs.    , same as                 2. 
6. 3. 
7. the defendant [or A. B ., the defendant's agent] satisfied the claim by payment before su it to 
the plaintiff [or to C.D., the plaintiff's agent] on the     day of   20, 
8. The defendant satisfied the claim by payment after suit to the plaintiff on the       day of  20 
 
No. 2  
DEFENCE IN SUITS ON BONDS  
1. The bond is not the defendant ’s bond.  
2. The defendant made payment to the plaintiff on the day according to the condition of the bond.  
3. The defendant made payment to the plaintiff after the day named and before suit of the 
principal and interest mentioned in the bond . 
No. 3  
DEFENCE IN SUITS ON GUARANTEES  
1. The principal satisfied the claim by payment before suit.  
2. The defendant was released by the plaintiff giving time to the principal debtor in pursuance of 
a binding agreement.  
No. 4  
DEFENCE IN ANY SUITS FOR DEBT  
1. As to Rs. 200 of the mone y claimed, the defendant is entitled to set off for goods sold and delivered by 
the defendant to the plaintiff.  
Particulars are as follows :              Rs. 
  1907 January 25th.       .     .    .     .     .      .    .         .      .        .      .    .         .     .    .  .   .  .     150  
,,     February 1st . . . . .  . .   . .   . .   .    .      .        .      .       .    .      .      .      .      .        .  . .    50   
 
        Total  200 
 252 2. As to the whole [ or as to Rs.................. .... , part of the money claimed ] the defendant made tender  
before suit of Rs.........and has paid the same into Court.  
No. 5  
DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INJURIES CAUSED BY NEGLIGENT DRIVING  
1. The defenda nt denies that the carries mentioned in the plaint was the  defendant's 
carriage, and that it was under the charge or control of the defendant's servants. The carriage 
belonged to...................... . of.....................Street, Calcutta, livery stable keepers employed by the 
defendant  to supply him with carr iages and horses and the person under whose charge and control the said 
carriage was, was the s ervant of the said.  
2. The defendant does not admit that the said carriage was turned out of Middleton Street either 
negligently, suddenly or without warning, or  at a rapid or dangerous pace.  
3. The defendant says the plaintiff might and could, by the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, 
have seen the said carriage approaching him, and avoided any collision with it.  
4. The defendant does not admit the statem ents contained in the third paragraph  of the plaint.  
No. 6  
DEFENCE IN ALL SUITS FOR WRONGS  
1. Denial of the several acts [or matters] complained of.  
No. 7  
DEFENCE IN ALL SUITS FOR DETENTION OF GOODS  
1. The goods were not the property of the plaintiff.  
2. The good were detained for a lien to which the defendant was entitled.  
Particulars are as follows: — 
1907, May 3rd To carriage of the goods claimed from Delhi to Calcutta: — 
45 maunds at Rs. 2 per maund.................Rs. 90 . 
No. 8  
DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INFRI NGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT  
1. The plaintiff is not  the author [ assignee, etc .] 
2. The book was not registered.  
3. The defendant did not infringe.  
No. 9  
DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INFRI NGEMENT OF TRADE MARK  
1. The trade mark is not the plaintiff’s . 
2. The alleged trade  mark is not a trade mark.  
3. The defendant did not infringe.  
No. 10  
DEFENCE IN SUITS RELATING TO NUISANCES  
1. The plaintiff’s lights are not ancient [ or deny his other alleged prescriptive rights] . 
2. The plaintiff’s lights will not be materially interfer ed with by the defendant’s buildings.  
3. The defendant denies that he or his servants pollute the water [ or do what is complained of].253 [If the defendant claims the right by prescription or otherwise to do what is complained of , he must 
say so, and must sta te the grounds of the claim, i.e., whether by prescription, grant or what. ] 
4. The plaintiff has been guilty of laches of which the following are particulars: — 
1870.  Plaintiff 's mill began to work.  
1871.  Plaintiff came into possession.  
1883.  First comp laint.  
5. As to the plaintiff's claim for damages the defendant will rely on the above grounds of defence, and  
says that the acts complain of have not  produced any damage to the plaintiff  [If  other grounds are relied on,  
they must be stated, e.g., limit ation as to past damage. ] 
No. 11 
DEFENCE TO SUIT FOR FORECLOSURE  
1. The defendant did not execute the mortgage.  
2. The mortgage was not transferred to the plaintiff ( if more than one transfer is alleged, say which is 
denied ). 
3. The suit is barred by artic le................................................of the Second Schedule to the 1Indian 
Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877).  
4. The following payment have been made , viz, :— 
(Insert date) — Rs. 1,000  
(Insert date) — Rs. 500  
5. The plaintiff took possession on the ..........  ............of  ... ..............and has received the rents ever since.  
6. The plaintiff released the debt on the  ....... ...................of.............................................   
7. The defendant transferred all his interest to  A. B. by a document dated ..........   
 No. 12   
DEFENCE TO SUIT FOR REDEMPTION  
1. The plaintiff ’s right to redeem is barred by article  of the Second Schedule to the 1Indian Limitation 
Act 1877 (15 of 1877).   
2. The plaintiff transferred all interest in the property to A. B.  
3. The defendant, by a document dated the....................day of ..............transferred all his interest in 
the mortgage -debt and property comprised in the mortgage to A.B. 
4. The defendant never took possession of the mortgaged property, or received the re nts thereof.  
(if the defendant admits possession for a time only, he should state the time and deny possession 
beyond what he admits. ) 
  
                                                      
1. See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  254 No. 13  
DEFENCE TO SUIT FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE  
1. The defendant did not enter into the agreement.  
2. A.B. was not the agent of the defendant (if alleged by plaintiff).  
3. The plaintiff has not performed the following conditions —(Conditions).  
4. The defendant did not—(alleged acts of part performance).  
5. The plaintiff's title to the property agreed to be sold is not such as the defendan t is bound to 
accept by reason of the following matter —(State why).  
6. The agreement is uncertain in the following respects —(State them).  
7. (or) The plaintiff has been guilty of delay.  
8. (or) The plaintiff has been guilty of fraud ( or misrepresentation).  
9. (or) The agreement is unfair.  
10. (or) The agreement was entered into by mistake.  
11. The following are particulars of (7), (8), (9), (10) (or as the case may be).  
12. The agreement was rescinded under Conditions of Sale, No. 11 (or by mutual agreement).  
(In cases where damag es are claimed and the defendant disputes his liability to damages, he must 
deny the agreement Or the alleged breaches, or show whatever other ground of defence he intends to 
rely on, e.g., the  1Indian Limitation Act, accord and satisfaction, release, frau d, etc.)  
No. 14  
DEFENCE IN ADMINISTRATION SUIT BY PECUNIARY LEGATEE  
1. A.B. ‘s will contained a charge of debts; he died insolvent; he was entitled at his death to some 
immovable property which the defendant sold and which produced the net sum of Rs....... ............, and the  
testator had some movable property which the defendant got in, and which produced the net sum of   Rs............  
2. The defendant applied the whole of the said sums and the sum of Rs.......................  ..........which the 
defend ant received from rents of the immovable property in the payment of the funeral and testamentary 
expenses and some of the debts of the testator . 
3. The defendant made up his accounts and sent a copy thereof to the plaintiff on the.................. ..day 
of......................  20.........  , and offered to plaintiff free access to the vouchers to verify such accounts,  
but he declined to avail himself of the defendant ’s offer.  
4. The defendant submits that the plaintiff ought to pay the cost of this suit.  
No. 15  
PROBATE OF WILL IN SOLEMN FOR M 
1. The said will and codicil of the deceased were not duly executed according to the provisions of the 
Indian Succession Act, 18652 (10 of 1865) [ or of the Hindu Wills Act, 18702 (21 of 1870)].  
2. The deceased at the t ime the said will and codicil respectively purport to have been executed, was 
not of sound mind, memory and understanding.  
3. The execution of the said will and, codicil was obtained by the undue influence of the plaintiff [and 
others acting with him whose  names are at present unknown to the defendant].  
4. The execution of the said will and codicil was obtained by the fraud of the plaintiff, such fraud so 
far as is within the defendant ’s present knowledge, being [ state the nature of the fraud ]. 
                                                      
1. See now the L imitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
2. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
 
 255 5. The decea sed at the time of the execution of the said will and codicil did not know and approve 
the contents thereof [ or of the contents of the residuary clause in the said will, as the case may be ]. 
6. The deceased made his true last will, dated the 1st January, 1 873, and thereby appointed the 
defendant sole executor thereof.  
The defendant claims —  
(1) that the Court will pronounce against the said will and codicil propounded by the plaintiff ;  
(2) that the Court will decree probate of the will of the deceased, dat ed the 1st January, 1873, in 
solemn form of law.  
No. 16  
PARTICULARS  (O.6, r. 5.)  
(Title of suit ) 
Particulars. —The following are the particulars of (here state the matters in respect of which 
particulars  have been ordered) delivered pursuant to the order of         the          of 
(Here set out the particulars ordered in paragraphs if necessary).  
 
  256 APPENDIX  B 
PROCESS  
No. 1. 
SUMMONS FOR DISPOSAL OF SUIT (O. 5, rr.1.5.)  
(Title ) 
To 
......................................... [Name, description and place of residen ce.] 
WH E R E A S  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  has instituted a suit against you for  you are hereby 
summoned to appear  in this Court in person, or by a pleader duly instructed (and able to answer all material 
questions relating  to the suit, or who sh all be accompanied by some person; able to answer all such 
questions, ............... on................. the............................. ...........day ................. of........................ 20............. ....., 
at........................................ .O’clock  in the................................................ noon, to answer the claim ; and 
as the day fixed for your appearance is appointed for the final disposal of the suit, you must be prepared 
to produce on that day all the witnesses upon whose e vidence and all the documents upon which you 
intend to rely in support of your defence.  
Take notice that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard 
and determined in your absence.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..............day  of.................................  ..........  20 
Judge  
NOTICE —1. Should you apprehend your witnesses will not attend of their own accord, you can have 
a summons from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness, and the product ion of any document 
that you have a right to call upon the witness to produce, on applying to the Court and on depositing the 
necessary expenses.  
2. If you admit the claim, you should pay the money into Court together with the costs of the suit, to 
avoid e xecution of the decree, which may be against your person or property, or both.  
 257 No. 2  
SUMMONS FOR SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES (O. 5,  rr.1. 5.)  
(Title ) 
 To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [Name, description and place of residence .] 
 WHEREAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  has instituted a suit against you 
for…………………………….. you are hereby summoned to appear  in this Court in person, or by a 
pleader duly instructed, and able to answer all material question relating to the suit, or who shal l be 
accompanied by some person able to answer all such questions, on               
the.................................... ..................... day of …… ...................... 20....................., at...................... O'clock 
in the…………. ............... .noon, to answer the claim; 1[and further you are hereby directed to file on that  
day a written statement of your defence and to produce on the said day all documents in your possession 
or power upon which you base your defence or claim for set -off or coun terclaim, and where you rely on 
any other document whether  in your possession or power or not, as evidence in support of your defence 
or claim for set -off or counterclaim, you shall enter such documents in a list to be annexed to the written 
statement].  
Take note that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard 
and determined in your absence.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the  Court, this  ..............  day of  ..................  20 ...........   
Judge.  
NOTICE —1. Should you apprehend your witnesses will not at tend of their own accord, you can 
have a summons from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness, and the production of any 
document that you have a right to call on the witness to produce, on applying to the Court and on 
depositing the necessary e xpenses.  
2. If you admit the claim, you should pay the money into Court together with the costs of the suit, 
to avoid execution of the decree, which may be against your person or property, or both.  
No. 3  
SUMMONS TO APPEAR IN PERSON (O. 5, r. 3.) 
(Title ) 
To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  [Name, description and place of residence. ] 
WH E R E A S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has instituted a suit against you 
for...............you are hereby summoned to appear in this  Court in person on the ….............................. day 
of ......................  20........................................at  O’clock in the.. ............ ......................noon, to answer the 
claim; and you are directed to produce on that day all the documents upon  which you intend to rely in 
support of your defence.  
Take notice that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard 
and determined in your absence.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this................... ....... day  of .............................  20 
Judge.  
  
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 94 , for certain words (w.e.f - 1-2-1977).  
 258 1[No. 4 
SUMMONS IN A SUMMARY SUIT  
(O. 37, r. 2)  
(Title) 
To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  [Name description and place of residen ce.] 
WHEREAS ........................... has instituted a suit against you under Order XXXVII of  the Code of Civil  
Procedure, 1908, for Rs.................and interest, you are hereby summoned to cause and appearance to be 
entered for you, within ten days from the service hereof, in default hereof the plaintiff will be entitled,  
after the expiration of the said period of ten days, to obtain a decree for any sum not exceeding the sum of 
Rs................... .and the sum of Rs..........................for costs, together with such interest, if any, as the Court may 
order.  
If you  cause an appearance to be entered for you, the plaintiff will thereafter server upon you a 
summons for judgment at the hearing of which you will be entitle to move the Court for leave to defend 
the suit.  
Leave to defend may be obtained if you satisfy the Co urt by affidavit or otherwise that there is 
defence to the suit on the merits or that it is reasonable that you should be allowed to defend.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this............................day of........................... 20...........  
Judge. ] 
 
2[No. 4A  
SUMMONS FOR JUDGMENT IN A SUMMARY SUIT  
(O. 37, r.  3) 
(Title) 
In the..............................Court, at..............................Suit No........................................... .....of 20 
XYZ          Plaintiff  
Versus  
ABC           Defendant  
Upon reading the affidavit of the plaintiff the Court makes the following order, namely :— 
Let all parties concerned attend the C ourt or Judge, as the case may be, on the .....................day of 
..................  20       , at .. ........................ O’clock in the forenoon on the hearing of the application of the 
plaintiff that he be at liberty to obtain judgment in this suit against the defendant ( or if against one or 
some or several, insert names) for Rs....................an d for interest and costs.  
Date the ......................day of..................  20          .] 
Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 94, for Form No. 4 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 94, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  259 No. 5  
NOTICE TO PERSON WHO, THE COURT CONSIDERS, SHOULD BE ADDED AS CO -PLAINTIFF  
(O. 1, r. 10)  
(Title) 
To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [Name, description and place of residence .] 
WHEREAS .........................has instituted a suit agai nst.........................for..............................and whereas 
it appears necessary that you should be added as plaintiff in the said suit in order to enable the Court 
effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved.  
Take notice that you should on or before the  ..................  day of  ........................  20, signify to this  
Court whether you consent to be so added.  
Given under my hand and  the seal of the Court, this  .................  day of  ......................  20 
Judge.  
No. 6  
SUMMONS TO LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE OF A DECEASED DEFENDANT  
(O. 22, r. 4)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS  the plaintiff  ....................  ........... instituted a suit in this Court on the … .......................... day 
of.......... ...../20 ....against the defendant ........ who has since deceased, and whereas the said plaintiff has 
made   an application to this Court alleging that you are the legal representative of the said,  ..  deceased, 
and desiring that you be made the defendant in his stead ; 
You are hereby summoned to attend in this Court on the …………  day of ...........  .........  ......20....... , at     
……………. A.M. to defend the said suit and, in default of your appearance on the day specified, the said  
suit will be heard and determined in your absence.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  .................  day of  ......................  20 
Judge.  
No. 7  
ORDER FOR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMONS FOR SERVICE IN THE JURISDICTION OF ANOTHER COURT  
(O. 5, r. 21)  
(Title) 
WHEREAS  it is stated that  ................................ ................................ ................................   
 
defendant  in the above suit is at present residi ng in........................... ...............................  
witness  
It is ordered that a summons returnable  on the  .................... day of ........................... 20.......  , be 
forwarded to the  ..............Court of  ................for  servic e on the said  
defendant /witness ............  with a duplicate of this proceeding.  
    
The court -fee of  .............  chargeable in respect to the summons has been realised on this Court in  
stamps.  
Dated  ........................ 20 .........   
J u d g e . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 260 No. 8  
ORDER FOR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMIONS TO BE SER VED ON A PRISONER  
(o. 5, r. 25.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
The Superintend ent of the Jail at.... ................................................ ..................... ...............................
 ................................ .............  ......... ......... .................................................. ....................................... .. 
Under the provisions of Order V, rule 24, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, a summons in 
duplicate is  here with forwarded for service on the defendant.......... ........  who is...............  a prisoner in 
jail, You are requested to cause a copy of the said summons to be served upon the said defendant and to 
return the original to this Court signed by the said defendant, with a statement of service endorsed 
thereo n by you.  
Judge.  
No. 9  
ORDER FOR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMONS TO BE SERVED ON A PUBLIC SERVANT OR SOLDIER  
(O. 5, rr. 27, 28.)  
(Title) 
To 
UNDER  the provisions of Order V, rule 27 ( or 28, as the case may be ), of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908,  a summons in dup licate is herewith forwarded for service on the 
defendant ……………. who is stated to be  serving under you. You are requested to cause a copy of the 
said su mmons to be served upon the said defendant and to return the original to this Court signed by the 
said def endant, with a statement of service endorsed thereon by you.  
Judge.  
N o .  1 0  
TO ACCOMPANY RETURNS OF SUMMONS OF ANOTHER  COURT  
(O. 5, r. 23.)  
(Title) 
Read proceeding from the  ..................  forwarding  ................  for service on  ...................  in Suit No.  
 ............................... Of...............20  ...........  of that Court.  
Read Serv ing Officer 's endorsement stating that the .....................and proof of the above having been  
duly taken by me on the oath of............................  and.................................it  is ordered that the...............be 
returned to the..... ........ with a copy of this proceeding.  
Judge.  
NOTE .—This form will be applicable to process other than summons, the service of which may have 
to be effected in the same manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 261 No. 11  
AFFIDAVIT OF PROCESS -SERVER TO ACCOMPANY RETURN OF A SUMMONS  OR NOTICE  
(O. 5, r. 18.)  
(Title) 
The affidavit of  ................................ ...... , son of  ...................................................................................................  
I............................................................................................... ............................. make oath  
                                                                                                                             affirm  
and say as follows : — 
(1) I  am  a process -server of this Court.  
(2) On the  day of... ................................... 20...........I  received a   summons  
  notice  
issued by the Court of  ...........in Suit No . .............of ............. 20........... , in the said Court, dated the
 day of   ..........20........... , for service on   
      (3) The said...............was at the time personal ly known to me, and I served the said  Summons  
  notice  
him On the ..........day of........ 20........, at about.................... O’clock in the ................   
her 
................noon at........... ...........by tendering a copy thereof  to him and requiring                                                                                             
her His  
her 
Signature to the original notice  
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Here state whether the person served sig ned or refused to sing the process, and in whose 
presence.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or, 
(3)  The said........................not being personally known to me.............accompanied me............to   
 and pointed out to me a person whom he stated to be the said......., and I served the  said..... summon s 
 notice  
on Him  
on the ......................day of................... 20......., at about...............o’clock in the..........   
 her 
 
noo
n at.....by tendering a copy thereof to  him   and req uiring him Signature to the original  summon  
 her                           her   notice  
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Here state whether the person served signed or refused to sing the process, and in whose 
presence.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or, 
(3)  The said..... ........and the house in which he ordinarily resides being personally known to me, I 
went to the said house, in ................and thereon the .................day, of ......................19  
at about.......................o’clock in the...............no on , I did not find the said....................  
(a)  262 (b) 
(a) Enter fully and exactly the manner in which the process was served, with special reference to 
Order 5, rules 15 and 17.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or, 
(3) One...........accompanied me to.. ..................and there pointed out to me which he said was the 
house in which......................ordinarily resides. I did not find the said...............there.  
(a) 
(b)  
 
(a) Enter fully and exactly the manner in which the process was served, with special reference to 
Order 5, rules 15 and 17.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or, 
If substituted service has been ordered, state fully and exactly the manner in which the summons was 
served with special reference to the terms of the order for substituted  service.  
Sworn  
 by the said............................................................................................................before  me 
affirmed  
this......................................................day  of.................. 20..............  
 
Empowered under section 139 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to 
administer the oath to deponents.  
No. 12  
NOTICE TO DEPENDANT  
(O. 9, r. 6.)  
(Title)  
To.........................................................  [Name, description and place of residence. ] 
WHEREAS  this day was fixed for the hearing of the above suit and a summons was issued to you and the 
plaintiff has appeared in this Court and you did not so appear, but from the return of the Nazir it has been 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court that the said summons was served on you but not in sufficient time 
to enable you to appear and answer on the day fixed in the said summons;  
Notice is hereby given to you that the hearing of the suit is adjourned this day and that 
the............... .... day of ..........................20.................................... is now fixed for the hearing of the same; 
in default of your appearance on the day last mentioned the suit will be heard and determined in your 
absence.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the C ourt, this ......................... day of ...............  20....... 
Judge.  
No. 13  
SUMMONS TO WITNESS  
(O. 16, rr. 1, 5.)  
(Title)  
To.........................................................   
WHEREAS your attendance is required to ............................ ....................................................................  
on behalf of the............................................................................................................. ..............in the above  
suit, you are hereby required [pers onally] to appear before this Court on the...................................  day of  
............  20..........., at.................... O’clock in the forenoon, and to bring with you [ or to send to  this 
 Court].  263 A sum of Rs ................, being your trav elling and other expenses and subsistence allowance for one 
day, is herewith sent. If you fail to comply with this order without lawful excuse, you will be subject to 
the consequences of non -attendance laid down in rule 12 of Order XVI of the Code of Civil  Procedure, 
1908.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this............................ day of..................... 20...............  
Judge.  
NOTICE .—(1) If you are sum moned only to produce a document and not to give evidence, you shall 
be deemed t o have complied with the summons if you cause such document to be produced in this Court 
on the day and hour aforesaid.  
(2) If you are detained beyond the day aforesaid, a sum of R s........................................will be 
tendered to you  for each da y's attendance beyond the day specified.  
 
No. 14  
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING ATTENDANCE OF WITNESS  (O. 16, r. 10.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS  it appears from the examination on oath of the serving officer that the summons could not 
be served upon the witness in the man ner prescribed by law : and whereas it appears that the 
evidence of the  witness is material, and he absconds and keeps out of the way for the purpose of 
evading the service of the  summons : This proclamation is, therefore, under rule 10 of Order XVI of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,  issued requiring the attendance of the witness in this Court on 
the.....................  day of................  20.........  at.......... O'clock in the forenoon and from day to day until he 
shall have leave to depart ;  and if  the witness fails to attend on the day and hour aforesaid he will be dealt 
with according to law.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ...............  day of  ..........................  20 ....  
Judge.
  
No. 15  
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING ATTENDANCE OF WITNESS  
(O. 16, r. 10.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREA S it appears from the examination on oath of the serving officer that the summons has been 
duly served upon the witness, and whereas it appears that the evidence of the witness is material and 
he has failed  to attend in compliance with such summons : This proclamation is, therefore, under rule 10 
of Order XVI of the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, issued requiring the attendance of the witness in this 
Court on the.......day  of..............  20.........   at........  O'clock in the forenoon, and from day to day  until he 
shall  have leave to depart; and if the witness fails to attend on the day and hour aforesaid he will be dealt 
with according to law.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of.......................... .......... ..20
  
Judge.  264 No. 16  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT OF PROPERTY OF WITNESS (O. 16, r. 10.) 
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS  the witness .............................................................................................................. ............ cited by  
............................................................................................................................. .......has not, after the 
expiration of the period limited in the proclamation issued for his attendance, appe ared in  Court; You 
are hereby directed to hold under attachment...................  property belonging to the said  witness to the 
value................... of  and to submit a return, accompanied with an inventory thereof,  
within  ................................ .....days.  
Given under my hand and  the seal of the Court, this..................................  day of.............................  20
 ................................ ........   
Judge.  
No. 17  
WARRANT OF ARREST OF WITNESS (O. 16, r. 10)  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS..................... .............................. ......................... .....has been duly served with a summons but has 
failed to attend (absconds and keeps out of the way for the purpose of avoiding service of a summons); 
You are hereby ordered to arrest and bring  the said........................... ........................................before the 
Court.  
You ar e further ordered to return this warrant on or before the  ................  day of ...........................  
20 ............  with an endorsement certifying the day on and the manner in which it has been executed,  
or the r eason why it has not been executed.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...................  day of.............................  20  
Judge.  265 No. 18  
WARANT OF COMMITTAL (O. 16, r. 16)  
(Title) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at  ................................ ..........   
WHEREAS  the plaintiff (or defendant) in the above -named suit has made application to this Court 
that security be taken for the appearance of ...... give evidence (or to produce a document), on   the day of
 ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 20  and whereas the Court has 
called upon the said........... ..to furnish such security, which he has failed to do; This is to require you to 
receive the  said...........into your custody in the civil prison and to produce him before this Court  at
.....................................on the said day and on such othe r day or days as may be hereafter ordered.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ...................  day of  ...............  20 ............   
Judge.  
No. 19  
WARRANT OF COMMITTAL (O 16, r. 18)  1 
(Title ) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at  ................................ ..  
WHEREAS ........................... , whose attenda nce is required before this Court in the above -named case to 
give evidence or to produce a document), has been arrested and brought before the Court in custody; 
and whereas owing to  the absence of the plaintiff (or defendant), the said...................ca nnot give such 
evidence (or produce  such document); and whereas the Court has called upon the said to..................to -
give security for his  appearance on the.............................day of................ 20................, 
at...................... ..............which he  has failed to do; This is to require you to receive the said.......  into 
your custody in the civil prison and to  produce him before this Court at.........  on the................  day 
of................  20 
GIVEN  under my hand and the s eal of the Court, this  day of        20  
Judge.  266 APPENDIX  C 
DISCOVERY, INSPECTION AND ADMISSION  
No. 1  
ORDER FOR DELIVERY OF INTERROGATORIES (O. 11, r 1.) 
In the Court of ...........................................................  
Civil Suit No. .............. ......of ..........................20  
A. B.  ................................................................                                                   Plaintiff , 
 against  
C.D.E.F . and G.H ...…....….                                                                             Defendants.  
Upon hearing  ........................   and upon reading the affidavit of  .................   filed the  ...............  day 
of………… 20……….; It is ordered that the………..be at liberty to deliver to the……… 
Interrogatories in writing, and that the said……….do answer the interrogat ories as prescribed by Order 
XI, rule 8, and that the costs of this application be…………..    
No. 2  
INTERROGATORIES  (O. 11, r. 4.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra)  
Interrogatories on behalf of the above -named [ Plaintiff or defendant C. D.] for the examination of 
the above -named [ defendants E.F. and G. H. or Plaintiff ]. 
1. Did not, etc.  
2. Has not, etc.  
etc.,   etc.,           etc.  
[The defendant E.F. is required to answer the interrogatories numbered ..................... ....] 
[The defendant G. H. is required to ans wer the interrogatories numbered .................... ..] 
No. 3  
ANSWER TO INTERROGATORIES (O. 11, r. 9.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra)  
The answer of the above -named defendant E. F., to the interrogatories for his examination by the 
above -named plaintiff.  
In answer of the said interrogatories, I, the above -named E. F., make oath and say as follows:  — 
 
1 
2 .   Enter answers to interrogatories in paragraphs numbered consecutively.  
3. I object to answer the interrogatories numbered on the ground that [ state groun ds of 
objection ]. 
No. 4 
ORDER FOR AFFIDAVIT AS TO DOCUMENTS (O. 11, r. 12.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Upon hearing………………; It is ordered that the………..do within…………..form the date of this 
order, answer on affidavit stating which documents are or have been i n his possession or power relating 
to the matter in question in this suit, and that the costs of this application be…………………… .  
 
 
 267  
No. 5  
AFFIDAVIT AS TO DOCUMENTS (O. 11, r. 13.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra)  
I, the above -named defendant C. D., make oath and  say as follows :  — 
1. have in my possession or power the documents relating to the matters in question in this suit 
set forth in the first and second parts of the first schedule hereto.  
2. object to produce the said documents set forth in the second part of the first schedule hereto 
[stale grounds of objection ] 
3. I have had but have not now, in my possession or power the documents relating to the matters 
in question in this suit set forth in the second schedule hereto.  
4. The last -mentioned documents were  last in my possession or power on.  [State when and what 
has become of them and in whose possession they now are ]. 
5. According to the best of my knowledge, information and belief I have not now, and never had, 
in my possession, custody or power, or in the  possession, custody or power of my pleader or agent, or 
in the possession custody or power of any other person on my behalf, any account, book of account, 
voucher, receipt, letter memorandum, paper or writing, or any copy of or extract from any such 
docum ent, or any other documents whatsoever, relating to the matters in question in this suit or any of 
them, or wherein any entry has been made relative to such matters or any of them, other than and 
except the documents set forth in the said first and second schedules hereto.  
No. 6  
ORDER TO PRODUCE DOCUMENTS FOR INSPECTION  (O. 11, r. 14.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Upon hearing………………and upon reading the affidavit of……………….. filed the………………  
 day of…………… 20……………; It is ordered that the………………..do, at all reasonabl e 
times, on reasonable notice, produce at………………….  , situate at …………………., the  
following documents, namely,………………, and that the……………be at liberty to inspect and 
produce the documents so produced, and to make notices  of their contents. In the meantime, it is ordered 
that all further proceedings be stayed and that the costs of this application be……………………….
   
No. 7  
NOTICE TO PRODUCE DOCUMENTS (O. 11, r. 16.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Take notice that the [plaintiff or defendant] requires you to produce for his inspection the following  
documents referred to in your [plaint or written statement or affidavit, dated the……………day of  
……………. 20………… ].  
[Describe documents required .] 
X. Y, pleader for the…………..    268 To Z., pleader for the………..    
No. 8  
NOTICE TO INSPECT DOCUME NTS (O. 11, r. 17.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Take notice that you can inspect the documents mentioned in your notice of the ……………..day 
Of…………….. 20……….. [ except the documents numbered  ……………….in that notice ins ert  
place of inspection] on Thursday next, th e instant, between the hours of 12 and 4 O’clock.  
Or, that the [plaintiff or defendant] objects to giving you inspection of documents mentioned in your 
notice of the day of……….. 20…………  , on the ground that [state the ground].  
No. 9  
NOTICE TO ADMIT DOCUMENT S (O. 12, r. 3.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Take notice that the plaintiff [or defendant] in this suit proposes to adduce in evidence the several 
documents hereunder specified, and that the same may be inspected by the defendant [or plaintiff], his 
pleader  or agent………... at…………on…………between the hours of…………………..; and the 
defendant [or plaintiff] is hereby required, within forty -eight hours from the last -mentioned hour, to admit 
that such of the said documents as are specified to be originals were respective ly written, signed or 
executed, as they purport respectively to have been; that such as are specified as copies are true copies; 
and such documents as ar e stated to have been served, sent or delivered were so served, sent or delivered, 
respectively, saving  all just exceptions to the admissibility of all such documents as evidence in this suit.  
      G.H. pleader  [as agent ] for plaintiff  [or defendant ]. 
To E.F., pleader  [or agent ] for defendant  [or plaintiff ].     
      
[Here describe the documents and speci fy as to each document whether it is original or a copy].  
No. 10  
NOTICE TO ADMIT FACTS  (O. 12, r. 5.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Take notice that the plaintiff [or defendant] in this suit requires the defendant [or plaintiff] to admit, 
for the purposes of this suit only, the several facts respectively hereunder specified; and the defendant [or 
plaintiff] is hereby required, within six days from the service of this notice, to admit the said several facts, 
saving all just exceptions to the admissibility of su ch facts as evidence in this suit.  
                                                                                G.H. pleader [or agent ] for plaintiff  [or defendant ].  
To E.F., pleader  [or agent ] for defendant [or plaintiff ].  
The facts, the admission of  which is required, are — 
1. That M. died on the 1st January, 1890.  
2. That he died intestate.  
3. That N. was his only lawful son.  
4. That O. died on the 1st April, 1896.  
5. That O. was never married.  269 No. 11  
ADMISSION OF FACTS PURSUANT TO NOTICE  (O. 12, r.  5.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
The defendant [ or plaintiff] in this suit, for the purposes of this suit only, hereby admits the several 
facts respectively hereunder specified, subject to the qualifications or limitations, if any, hereunder 
specified, savi ng all  just exceptions to the admissibility of any such facts, or any of them, as evidence in 
this suit:  
Provided that this admission is made for the purposes of this suit only, and is not an admission to be 
used against the defendant [ or plaintiff] on any  other occasion or by any one other than the plaintiff       
[or defendant, or party requiring the admission].  
 
E. F., pleader  [or agent ] for defendant [or plaintiff ]. 
 
To G. H.,  pleader  [or agent ] for plaintiff  [or defendant ]. 
 
Facts admitted  Qualificatio ns or limitations, if any, subject to 
which they are admitted  
1. That M. died on the 1st  January, 1890…..  1.  
2. That he died intestate……………………...  2. 
3. That N. was his lawful son ……………….  3. But not that he was his only lawful son.  
4. That O. died……… ……………………….  4. But not that he died on the 1st  April, 1896.  
5. That O. was never married……………….  5. ...................................................................  
 
 
No. 12  
NOTICE TO PRODUCE (GENERAL FORM)  (O. 12, r. 8.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra)  
Take notice that you are hereby required to produce and show to the Court at the first hearing of 
this suit , all books, papers, letters, copies of letters and other writings and documents in your custody , 
possession or power , containing any entry, memorandum or minute relating to the matters in question 
in this suit , and particularly.  
                                                                                     G. H. pleader [or agent] for plaintiff [or defendant ]. 
 
  To E. F. pleader or agent ] for defe ndant  [or plaintiff ]. 270 APPENDIX  D 
DECREES  
No. 1  
DECREE IN ORIGINAL SUIT (O. 20, rr. 6,7.)  
(Title)  
Claim for  ............................................................................................................................. ...........  
THIS suit c oming on this day for final disposal before  ................................ ... in the presence of  
 ................................ ....... for the plaintiff and of  ............................  for the defendant, it is ordered and  
decreed that  ................................ ..........  and that the sum of Rs  ................................ ...........  be paid by  
the ................................ ....... to the  .............................  on account of the costs of this suit, with interest  
thereon at the rate  of ................................ ... per cent. per annum from this date to date of realization.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court , this .....................  day of  ................................ ...   
20...            
 
Judge.  
Costs of Suit  
Plaintiff     Defendant     
 Rs.  A. P.  Rs. A. P. 
1. Stamp for plaint………..     Stamp for power ……………...     
2. Do . for power……………     Do. for petition………     
3. Do . for exhibits………….     Pleader’s fee………….     
4. Pleader’s fee on Rs. ......    Subsistence for witnesses…     
5. Subsistence for witnesses..     Service of process……….     
6. Commissioner’s  fee……     Commissioner’s fee………..     
7. Service of process……..         
                           Total                                Total     
 
 No. 2  
SIMPLE MONEY DECREE  
(Section 34)  
(Title) 
Claim for .................................................... ..................................................................................................  
THIS suit coming on this........................day for final disposal before..........in the presence  of  
..............................for the plaintiff an d of................. for the defendant; It is ordered that the...................do  
pay to the..................  the sum of Rs................  with interest thereon at the rate of.......................per cent.  
per annum from.............................. ........to the date of realization of the said sum and do also pay     
Rs........ .............  , the costs of this suit, with interest thereon at the rate of …….. per cent.  per annum from  
this date to the date of realization.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of.................... 20  
Judge.  
 271 Costs of Suit  
 
Plaintiff  Defendant  
 Rs. A. 
 P.  Rs. A. P. 
1. Stamp for plaint..............  
2. Do. for power.............  
3. Do. for exhibit...........  
4. Pleader's fee on Rs............  
5. Subsistence for 
witnesses........  
6. Commissioner’s fee..........  
7. Service of process..............   
Total      Stamp for power  ......  
    
2. Do. for power.............  
3. Do. for exhibit...........  
    Do. for petition  .......  
    
3. Do. for e xhibit...........  
        Pleader’s fee .........  
   
   
      
4. Pleader's fee on Rs............  
    Subsistence for witnesses     
5. Subsistence for 
witnesses........  
    Service of process  ...  
    
6. Commissioner’s fee..........  
    Commissioner’s  .....  
    
7. Service of process..............   
        
Total     Total     
1[No. 3 
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 2. —Where accounts are directed to be taken.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this.................................  day, etc.; It is h ereby ordered and decreed that it be  
referred to......................  as the Commissioner to take the accounts following: — 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the plaintiff for principal and interest on his 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint (such  interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal 
or where no such rate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the Court deems 
reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the  plaintiff or 
by any other person by the order or for the use of the plaintiff or which without the wilful default of 
the plaintiff or such person might have been so received;  
(iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred by the plaintiff up to t his date for costs, 
charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage -security, together 
with interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing 
such rate, at the same rate as  is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. 
per annum);  
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any 
act or omission of the plaintiff which is destructive of, or permanently  injurious to, the property or by 
his failure to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or by 
the terms  of the mortgage -deed.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause ( ii) or adjudged  
due under clause ( iv) above , together  with interest thereon, shall first be adjusted against any sums paid 
by the plaintiff under clause ( iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to 
the mortgage -money or,  as the case may be, debited in reduction of the amount due to the plaintiff on 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch., for the  original  forms 3 to 11.  
 272 account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due, and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner  shall present the account to this Court 
with all convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before 
the..............................................................day  of...........  and that upon such report of the Commissioner 
being recei ved, it shall be confirmed and  countersigned, subject to such modification as may be necessary 
after consideration of such objections as the parties to the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed —  
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the.................................  day of............................... , 
or any later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court  shall 
fined due, and the sum of Rs....................... for the costs of the suit awarded to the plaintiff.  
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses  as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under 
rule 11, of Order XXX IV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall 
bring into Court all documents in his possession or pow er relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint 
mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he 
appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said prope rty free from the said 
mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff-or any person claiming under him 
or any person under whom he claims and free from all liability whatsoever or arising from the mortgage or 
this suit and shall, if so required , deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintiff 
shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree that the  defendant shall thenceforth stand 
absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in 
the schedule annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable 
possession of t he said property; and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to 
time as they may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions 
as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged p roperty ]  
1[No. 3A  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 2. —Where the Court declares the amount due.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this................................  day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to  the 
plaintiff o n his mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this .................................................day 
of......................  is the sum of Rs.........................  for principal, the sum of Rs....................  for interest on  
the said p rincipal, the sum of Rs. ........................  for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of 
the suit) properly incurred by the plaintiff in respect of the mortgage -security, together with interest 
thereon, and the  sum of Rs........  for the c osts of this suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all sum of 
Rs............   
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows: — 
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the....................................day of............or 
any late r date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court of the said sum of 
Rs.................... , 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and the Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  273 (ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect o f such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXI V of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ,  
the plaintiff shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
property in the plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to 
such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff sh all, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said 
property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff or 
any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims and free from all liability 
what soever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant 
quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintif f 
may apply to the Court for a final decree that the defendant shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred 
and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed 
hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property; and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 4  
FINAL DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 3.)  
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree passed in this suit on the ……… day of...................................  
and further orders ( if any) dated the ………….. day of …………. .....and the application of the plaintiff  
dated the …………… day of …………. .........for a final decree and  after hearing  the parties  and it 
appearing that the payment directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the  defendant or 
any person on his behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the said mortgage . 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the defendant and all persons claiming through or under him be 
and they are hereby absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right of redemption of and in the 
property in the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned; *[and (if the defendant be in possession of the 
said mortgaged property) that the defendant shall deliver to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession  
of the said mortgaged proper ty]. 
2. And it is hereby further declared that the whole of the liability whatsoever of the defendant up to 
this day arising from the said mortgage mentioned in the plaint or from this suit is hereby discharged and 
extinguished . 
Schedule  
(Description of the Mortgage Property ).] 
1[No. 5 
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR SALE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 4. —Where accounts are directed to be taken.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this....................................day, etc ; It is hereby ordered and d ecreed that it be 
referred to....................as the Commissioner to take the accounts following: — 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the plaintiff for principal and interest on his mortgage  
mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be comput ed at the rate payable on the principal or where no such 
rate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the plaintiff or by 
any o ther person by the order or for the use of the plaintiff or which without the wilful default of the 
plaintiff or such person might have been so received;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and the Sch ., for  Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to  be deleted.  274 (iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred by the plaintiff up to this date for costs, 
charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage -security, together with 
interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate, 
at the same rate as is payable on the pri ncipal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. per annum);  
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any 
act or omission of the plaintiff which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the pro perty or by 
his failure to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or by 
the terms of the mortgage -deed.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause (ii) or adjudged 
due un der clause (iv) above, together with interest thereon, shall first be adjusted against any sums paid by 
the plaintiff under clause (iii), together with interest ther eon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to the 
mortgage -money or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the plaintiff on 
account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court  
with all convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before the...............day of..........,  and  
that upon such report of the Commissioner being received, it shall be confirmed and countersigned, 
subject to such mod ification as may be necessary after consideration of such objections as the parties to 
the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed —  
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the...............day 
of...................... ............................or  any later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the 
Court, such sum as the Court shall find  due and the sum of Rs..............  for the costs of the suit awarded 
to the plaintiff;  
(ii) that on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit, and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as ma y be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff 
shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentioned, and all such do cuments shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he 
appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said property free from the 
mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff o r any person claiming under 
him or any person under whom he claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quit e and 
peaceable possession of the said property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as af oresaid, the plaintiff may 
apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such application being 
made the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the purposes of 
such sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court, or such officer as it appoints, all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property.  
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid in to 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount payable to the plaintiff under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this suit 
and in payment of any amount which t he Court may adjudge due to the plaintiff in respect of such costs of the 
suit, and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent 
interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedu le to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to 
receive the same.  
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient or payment in full of the amount payable to the plaintiff as aforesaid, the plaintiff shall be at 
liberty  (where such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law 
for the time being in force) to apply for a perso nal decree against the defendant for the amount of the 
balance; and that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property. ] 275 1[No. 5A  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR SALE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 4. —When the Court declares the amount due.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this...................day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the plaintiff  
on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this....................  day of.........................is the sum  
of Rs.................  for principal, the sum of Rs..............................for interest on the said principal , the sum of  
Rs........  for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by  the plaintiff 
in respect of the mortgage -security, together with interest thereon, and the sum of 
Rs.............................. for the costs of the suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all the sum of Rs  ............  
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows: — 
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the...............  day of............................  or any 
later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court, the said sum of Rs.............. ; 
(ii) that on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of  the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff 
shall bring int o Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as 
he appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -conv ey or re -transfer the said property free from the 
said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff or any person claiming 
under him or any person under whom he claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant 
quite and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintiff 
may apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such applicatio n 
being made, the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the 
purposes of such sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction herefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount payable to th e plaintiff under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this 
suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the plaintiff in respect of such 
costs of the suit, and such costs, charges and expenses as may be pa yable under rule 10, together with 
such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons 
entitled t o receive the same.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient or payment in full of the amount payable to the plaintiff as aforesaid, the plaintiff shall be at 
liberty (where such remed y is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law 
for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against the defendant for the amount of the 
balance; and that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from ti me to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property. ] 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and the Sch ., for Form 3 to 11.  276 1[No. 6 
FINAL DECREE FOR SALE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 5.) 
(Title)   
Upon reading the preliminary decree passed in this suit on the ......... day of..............  and further orders  
(if any) dated the  ........  day of ........  and the application of the plaintiff dated the ........ day........  of          
for a final decree and after hearing  the parties and it appearing that the payment directed by the said 
decree and orders has not been made by the defendant or any person on his behalf or any other person 
entitled to redeem the mortgage . 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the mortgaged pr operty in the aforesaid preliminary decree 
mentioned or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes of such sale the plaintiff shall 
produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints all documents in his possession or power relating 
to the mortgaged property.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
the Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of 
the amount payable t o the plaintiff under the aforesaid preliminary decree and under any further orders 
that may have been passed in this suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may have adjudged 
due to the plaintiff for such costs of the suit including the costs of  this application and such costs, charges 
and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the 
balance,  if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to receive the same. ] 
1[No. 7  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION WHERE ON DEFAULT OF PAYMENT BY MORTGAGOR A DECREE 
FOR FORECLOSURE IS PASSED  
(Order XXXIV, rule 7. —Where accounts are directed to be taken.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this .........  day, etc.; It is hereby ordered and decreed that it be referred 
to............ as the Commissioner to take the account following: — 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the defendant for princ ipal and interest on the 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal or 
where no such rate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the i ncome of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the defendant 
or by any other person by order or for the use of the defendant or which without the wilful default of 
the defendant or such person might have been so received;  
(iii) an account of a ll sums of money property incurred by the defendant up to this date for costs, 
charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage -security, together with 
interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed betw een the parties, or failing such rate, 
at the same rate as is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. per annum);  
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any 
act or omissio n of the defendant which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the property or 
by his failure to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or 
by the terms of the mortgage -deed.  
2. It is hereby further order ed and decreed that any amount received under clause (ii) or adjudged due 
under clause (iv) above together with interest thereon, shall be adjusted against any sums paid by the 
defendant under clause (iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, i f any, shall be added to the 
mortgage -money or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the defendant on 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 9 and the Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  277 account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court    
with all convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before the ..……………………… day 
of………………… , and that upon such report of the Commissioner being receive d, it shall be confirmed  
and countersigned, subject to such modification as may be necessary after consideration of such 
objections as the parties to the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed —  
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Co urt on or before the  .........  day of   ......... , or any later date up to  
which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court shall find due and the 
sum of Rs.  ......... for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant;  
(ii) that, on such payment, and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit, and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subs equent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the 
defendant shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
property, in the plaint ment ioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff, or to 
such person as he appoints, and the defendant shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said 
property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all in -cumbrance s created by the defendant 
or any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims and free from all liability 
whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff 
quiet and peaceable possessi on of the said property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant 
shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree that the plaintiff shall thenceforth stand absolutely 
debarred and  foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule 
annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the 
said property; and that the parties shall be at liberty  to apply to the Court from time to time as they may 
have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 7A  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION WHERE O N DEFAULT OF PAYMENT BY MORTGAGOR 
DECREE A DECREE FOR  SALE IS PASSED  
(Order XXXIV, rule 7. —Where accounts are directed to be taken.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this  ......... day, etc.; It is hereby ordered and decreed that it be referred to  ……. a s 
the Com missioner to take the accounts following :— 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the defendant for principal and interest on the 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal or 
where no such r ate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the defendant 
or by any other person by the order or for the use of the defendant o r which without the wilful default 
of the defendant or such person might have been so received;  
(iii) an account of all sums of money property incurred by the defendant up to this date for costs, 
charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in r espect of the mortgage -security, together with 
interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or failing such rate, 
at the same rate as is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. per annum);  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and the Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  278 (iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any 
act or omission of the defendant which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the property or 
by his failure to perform any of the duties impose d upon him by any law for the time being in force or 
by the terms of the mortgage -deed.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause ( ii) or adjudged 
due under clause ( iv) above, together with interest thereon, shal l first be adjusted against any sums paid 
by the defendant under clause ( iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to 
the mortgage -money, or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the defendant 
on account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court 
with all convenient despatch after ma king all just allowances on or before the …………… day 
of……………. , and that, upon such report of the Commissioner being received, it shall be confirmed and 
countersigned, subject to such modification as may be necessary after consideration of such objections a s 
the parties to the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby f urther ordered and decreed —  
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the ………………. day of ………….. or any 
later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as t he Court shall 
find due and the sum of Rs. ………………… for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant;  
(ii) that, or such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such  costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the 
defendant shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
property in the plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff , or to 
such person as he appoints, and the defendant shall, if so required , re-convey or re -transfer the said 
property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the defendant 
or any person claiming under him or any person under whom the claims and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to the plain tiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant 
may apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such application 
being made, the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the 
purposes of such sale the defendant shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all 
documents in his possession of powe r relating to the mortgaged property.  
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount p ayable to the defendant under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in his 
suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the defendant in respect of such 
costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as  may be payable under rule 10, together with such 
subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons 
entitled to receive the same.  
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient for payment in full of the amount payable to the defendant as aforesaid, the defendant shall be 
at liberty (where  such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law 
for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against the plaintiff for the amount of the 
balance; and the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court f rom time to time as they may have occasion, 
and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
(Description of the mortgaged property ).]279 1[No. 7B  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION WHERE ON DEFAULT OF PAYMENT  BY MORTGAGOR A DECREE 
FOR FORECLOSURE IS PASSED  
(Order  XXXIV, rule 7. —Where the Court declares the amount due.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this …….……. day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
defendant on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this …….. day of ………… is the 
sum of Rs. …….…… for principal, the sum of Rs. ………… for interest on the said principal, the sum of 
Rs. ………... for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by the 
defendant in respect of the mortgage -security together with interest thereon, and the sum of Rs. …...……. 
for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant, making in all the sum of Rs. ……………  
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows: —  
(i) that th e plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the.………….. day of …………. or any later 
date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. ……………  
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may  fix of 
such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such cost of the suit and such costs, charges 
and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be 
payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First S chedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
the defendant shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the 
mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the 
plaintiff, or to s uch person as he appoints, and the defendant shall, if so required, re -convey or         
re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances 
created by the defendant or any person claiming under him or any perso n under whom he claims, and 
free from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decree d that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant 
may apply to the Court for a final decree that the plaintiff shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and 
foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedu le annexed 
hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property; and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such applicatio n or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 7C  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION WHERE ON DEFAULT OF PAYMENT BY MORTGAGOR A DECREE 
FOR SALE IS PASSED  
(Order XXXIV, rule 7. —Where the Court declares the amount due .) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this …………… day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
defendant on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this ………… day of ……….. is the 
sum of Rs. ………….. for pr incipal, the sum of Rs. ………... for interest on the said principal, the sum of 
Rs. ………….. for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by the 
defendant in respect of mortgage -security together with interest thereon, a nd the sum of Rs. ………… for 
the cost of this suit awarded to the defendant, making in all the sum of Rs. ……………    
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows: — 
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the ………… day of …………… or any later 
date up to which time for payment may he extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. …………… ;
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  280 (ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the defendant 
shall bring into Cou rt all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff or such person as he 
appoints, and the defendant shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said property to the plaintiff 
free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the defendant or any 
person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the 
plainti ff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant 
may apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such ap plication 
being made, the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the 
purposes of such sale the defendant shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints all 
documents in his possession or power r elating to the mortgaged property.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount paya ble to the defendant under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this 
suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the defendant in respect of such 
costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as m ay be payable under rule 10, together with such 
subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons 
entitled to the same.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient for the payment in full of the amount payable to the defendant as aforesaid, the defendant shall 
be at liberty (where such remedy is open to him under the terms of the mortgage and is not barred by any 
law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against the plaintiff for the amount of the 
balance; and that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court fr om time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 7D  
FINAL DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE IN A REDEMPTION SUIT ON DEFAULT OF PA YMENT BY MORTGAGOR  
(Order XXXIV, rule 8.)  
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree in this suit on the .............…. day of ……….…. and further 
order (if any) dated the ………..…… day of ……………... , and the application of the defendant dated 
the ……….... d ay of ………..…… for a final decree and after hearing the parties, and it appearing that 
the payment as directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the plaintiff or any person on 
his behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the mortgage . 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the plaintiff and all persons claiming through or under him be 
and they are hereby absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right of redemption of and in the 
property in the aforesaid preliminary decree menti oned *[and ( if the plaintiff  be in possession of the said 
mortgaged property ) that the plaintiff shall deliver to the defendant quit and peaceable possession of the 
said mortgaged property].  
2. And it is hereby further declared that the whole of the liabil ity whatsoever of the plaintiff up to this 
day arising from the said mortgage mentioned in the plaint or from this suit is hereby discharge and 
extinguished.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be deleted.  281 
 1[No. 7E  
FINAL DECREE FOR SALE IN A REDEMPTION ON SUIT ON DEFAULT OF PAYMENT BY MORTGAGOR  
(Order XXXIV, rule 8)  
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree in this suit on the ……………. day of ……………….. and 
further order (if any) dated the …………….. day of ……………….. , and the application of the 
defendant dated the ……………… day of ………………. for a final decree an d after hearing the parties, 
and it appearing that the payment directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the 
plaintiff or any person on his behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the mortgage;  
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the mortgaged property in the aforesaid preliminary decree 
mentioned or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes of such sale the defendant shall 
produce before the Court, or such officer as it appoints, a ll documents in his possession o r power relating 
to the mortgaged property.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount payable to the defendant under the aforesaid preliminary decree and under any further orders that 
may have been passed in this suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may have adjudged due 
to the defendant for such costs of this suit includi ng the costs of this application and such costs, charges 
and expenses as may be payable under rule l0, together with the subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and tha t the 
balance, if any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons entitled to receive the same. ] 
1[No. 7F  
FINAL DECREE IN A SUIT FOR FOR ECLOSURE, SALE OR REDEMPTION WHERE THE MORTGAGOR PAYS THE 
AMOUNT OF THE DECREE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 3, 5 and 8)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this ................................. day for further consideration and it appearing that on 
the …………….. day of ……………….. the mortgagor or …………….. , the same being a person 
entitled to redeem, has paid into Court all amounts due to the mortgagee under the preliminary decree 
dated the …………………. day of ……………….. ; It is hereby ordered and decreed that: —  
(i) the mortgagee do execute a deed of re -conveyance of the property in the aforesaid preliminary 
decree mentioned in favour of the mor tgagor *[or, as the case may be, ……………….. who has 
redeemed the property] or an acknowledgement of the payment of the amount due in his favour;  
(ii) the mortgagee do bring into Court all documents in his possession and power relating to the 
mortgaged proper ty in the suit.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that upon the mortgagee executing the deed of re -
conveyance or acknowledgement in the manner aforesaid, — 
(i) the said sum of Rs. ……………… be paid out of Court to the mortgagee;  
(ii) the said dee ds and documents brought into the Court be delivered out of Court to the 
mortgagor *[or the person making the payment] and the mortgagee do, when so required, concur in 
registering, at the cost of the mortgagor *[or other person making the payment], the sa id deed of         
re-conveyance or the acknowledgement in the office of the Sub -Registrar of ……………….; and  
(iii) *[if the mortgagee, plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, is in possession of the 
mortgaged property] that the mortgagee do forthwith del iver possession of the mortgaged property in 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be deleted.  282 
 the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned to the mortgagor *[or such person as aforesaid who has 
made the payment].  
1[No. 8  
DECREE AGAINST MORTGAGOR PERSONALLY FOR BALANCE AFTER THE SALE OF THE MORTGAGED 
PROPE RTY  
(Order XXXIV, rules 6 and 8A)  
(Title) 
Upon reading the application of the mortgagee (the plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be) and 
reading the final decree passed in the suit on the .................... day of ......................... and the Court being 
satisfied that the net proceeds of the sale held under the aforesaid final decree amounted to Rs. ………….  
and have been paid to the applicant out of the Court on the ………………... day of ……………….. and 
that the balance now due to him under the aforesa id decree is Rs. ………… ;  
And whereas it appears to the Court that the said sum is legally recoverable from the mortgagor 
(plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be) personally;  
It is hereby ordered and decreed as follows: —  
That the mortgagor (plaintiff or  defendant, as the case may be) do pay to the mortgagee (defendant or 
plaintiff, as the case may  be) the said sum of Rs. …………. with further interest at the rate of six per cent. 
per annum from the ………………… day of ……………….. (the date of payment out of Court r eferred 
to above) up to the date of realisation of the said sum, and the costs of this application .] 
1[No. 9  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE OF SALE  
[Plaintiff  . . . . . . . . . . . 1st Mortgagee,  
 vs 
Defendant No. 1  . . . . . . . . . . .  Mortgagor,  
Defendant No. 2  . . . . . . . . . . . 2nd Mortgagee.]  
(Order XXXIV, rules 2 and 4)  
(Title)  
The suit coming on this ……………. day, etc; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
plaintiff on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this da y of ……………… is the sum of 
Rs. ………………….. for principal, the sum of Rs. …………………. for interest on the said principal, 
the sum of Rs. ……………… for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) incurred 
by the plaintiff in respect of the mortgage -security with interest thereon and sum of Rs. …………… for 
the costs of this suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all the sum of Rs. …………….. .  
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due to defendant No. 2 in respect 
of his mortg age if the mortgage -money due thereunder has become payable at the date of the suit.)  
2. It is further declared that the plaintiff is entitled to payment of the amount due to him in priority to 
defendant No. 2 *[or (if there are several subsequent mortgage es) that the several parties hereto are 
entitled in the following order to the payment of the sums due to them respectively: —]. 
3. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows: —  
(i) (a) that defendants or one of them do pay into Court on or before the ………................... day   
of ……..…….. or any later date up to which time for payment has been extended by the Court the 
said sum of Rs. …………….. due to the plaintiff; and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be deleted . 283 
 (b) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before the day of ……………………. or any  later 
date up to which time for payment has been extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. …………… due 
to defendant No. 2; and  
 
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared to be due to the plaintiff by defendants or either of them in 
the manner prescribed in clause ( i) (a) and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of 
such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequ ent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff 
shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentione d, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant No………. (who has 
made the payment), or to such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -convey or   
re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and cl ear of and from all incumbrances created 
by the plaintiff or any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims, and also free 
from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to 
the d efendant No……… (who has made the payment) quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property.  
(Similar declarations to be introduced, if defendant No. 1 pays the amount found or declared to be 
due to defendant No. 2 with such variations as may be necessar y having regard to the nature of his 
mortgage ). 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid of the amount 
due to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree —  
(i) *[in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage where the only 
remedy provided for in the mortgage -deed is foreclosure and not sale ] that the defendants jointly and 
severally shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed  of and from all right to redeem 
the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver to 
the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property; or  
(ii) *[in the case of any other mortgage ] that the  mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof 
shall be sold; and that for the purposes of such sale the plaintiff shall produce before Court or such 
officer as it appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property; 
and 
(iii) *[in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 4 (ii) above ] that the money realised by 
such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of 
the sale) in payment of the amount payable to the plaint iff under this decree and under any further 
orders that may have been passed in this suit and in payment of the amount which the Court may 
adjudge due to the plaintiff in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be paya ble under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under          
rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the 
balance, if any, shall be applied in payment of the amount due to de fendant No. 2; and that if any 
balance be left, it shall be paid to the defendant No. 1 or other persons entitled to receive the same; 
and 
(iv) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the 
amounts due to the p laintiff and defendant No. 2, the plaintiff or defendant No. 2 or both of them, as 
the case may be, shall be at liberty (when such remedy is open under the terms of their respective 
mortgages and is not barred by any law for the time being in force) to app ly for a personal decree 
against defendant No. 1 for the amounts remaining due to them respectively.  
 
 
 
* Words not required to be deleted . 
 
 284 
 5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed —  
(a) that if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of th is suit the amount adjudged due to the 
plaintiff, but defendant No. 1 makes default in the payment of the said amount, defendant No. 2 shall 
be at liberty to apply to the Court to keep the plaintiff's mortgage alive for his benefit and to apply for 
a final  decree ( in the same manner as the plaintiff might have done under clause  4 above )—  
*[(i) that defendant No. 1 shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and 
from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule anne xed hereto and 
shall, if so required, deliver up to defendant No. 2 quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property;] or   
*[(ii) that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes 
of such sale defendant No. 2 sha ll produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property;] and  
(b) (if on the application of defendant No. 2 such a final decree for foreclosure is passed), that the 
whole of th e liability of defendant No. 1 arising from the plaintiff's mortgage or from the mortgage of 
defendant No. 2 or from this suit shall be deemed to have been discharged and extinguished.  
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed * [ in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 5 
above ]—  
(i) that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after deduction 
therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the amount paid by defendant No. 2 in respect 
of the p laintiff's mortgage and the costs of the suit in connection therewith and in payment of the 
amount which the Court may adjudge due in respect of subsequent interest on the said amount; and that 
the balance, if any, shall then be applied in payment of the a mount adjudged due to defendant No. 2 in 
respect of his own mortgage under this decree and any further orders that may be passed and in payment 
of the amount which the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of this suit and such costs, 
charges and expenses as may be payable to defendant No. 2 under rule 10, together with such 
subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to d efendant No. 1 or other persons 
entitled to receive the same; and  
(ii) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the amount due 
in respect of the plaintiff's mortgage or defendant No. 2 ’s mortgage, defendant No . 2 shall be at liberty 
(where such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law for the 
time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against No. 1 for the amount of the balance.  
7. And it is hereby further orde red and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court 
from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give 
such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property  
1[No. 10 
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION OF PRIOR MORTGAGE AND FORECLOSURE OR SALE ON 
SUBSEQUENT MORTGAGE  
[Plaintiff  . . . . . . .  2nd Mortgagee,  
 vs. 
Defendant No. 1.  . . . . . .  Mortgagor,  
Defendant No. 2  . . . . .  . 1st Mortgagee].  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Schedule, for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be deleted . 
 285 
  
 (Order XXXIV, rul es 2, 4, and 7)  
(Title) 
The suit coming on this ……... day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to defendant No. 2 
on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this ……..…. day of ………..…. is the sum of 
Rs. ………...….. for principal, the  sum of Rs. ……………. for interest on the said principal, the sum of 
Rs. ………….. for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by 
defendant No. 2 in respect of the mortgage -security with interest thereon and the sum of Rs . ………. for 
the costs of this suit awarded to defendant No. 2, making in all the sum of Rs. ……………….  
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due from defendant No. 1 to the 
plaintiff in respect of his mortgage if the mortgage -money d ue thereunder has become payable at the date 
of the suit. ) 
2. It is further declared that defendant No. 2 is entitled to payment of the amount due to him in 
priority  to the plaintiff *[or ( if there are several subsequent mortgages) that the several partie s hereto are 
entitled i n the  following order to the payment of the sums due to them respectively : —] 
3. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows: —  
(i) (a) that the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 or one of them do pay into Court on or before the …. 
day of ………………. or any later date up to which time for payment has extended by the Court the 
said sum of Rs. ………………. due to defendant No. 2; a nd 
(b) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before the ……………. day of …………….. or 
any later date up to which ti me for payment has been extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. 
………… due ……………… to the plaintiff; and  
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared due to defendant No. 2 by the plaintiff defendant No 1 or 
either of them in the manner prescribed in clause (i)(a) and on payment thereafter before such date as 
the Court may fix of such amount as the Court may adjudge due respect of such costs of the suit and 
such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable un der rule 10, together with such subsequent 
interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XX XIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, defendant No. 2 shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power 
relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mention ed and all s uch documents shall be delivered 
over to the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 (whoever made the payment), or to such person as he appoints, 
and defendant No. 2 shall, if so required, reconvey or re -transfer the said property free from the said 
mortgage and cle ar of and from  all incumbrances created by defendant No. 2 or any person claiming 
under him or any person u nder whom he claims, and also free from all liability whatsoever arising 
from the mortgage or this s uit and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 
(whoever has made t he payment) quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
(Similar declarations) to be introduced, if defendant No. 1 pays the amount found or declared due the 
plaintiff with such variations as may be necessary having regard to the nature of his mortgage.)  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, of the amount 
due to defendant No. 2, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty to apply to the Court that the suit be dismissed 
or a final decree —  
(i) *[in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage where the or remedy 
provided for in the mortgage -deed is foreclosure and not sale ] that the plaintiff and defend ant No. 1 
jointly and severally s hall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to 
redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall; if required, deliver 
to the defendant No. 2 quiet and peaceable possession of the said prop erty; or  
 
* Words not required to be deleted.  286 
  
(ii) *[in the case of any other mortgage ] that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part the reof 
shall be sold; and that for the purposes of such sale defendant No. 2 shall produce before the Court 
such offi cer as it appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
proper ty and 
(iii) *[in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 4 (ii) above ] that the money realised such 
sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after  deduction therefrom of the expenses of sale) in 
payment of the amount payable to defendant No. 2 under the decree and any further orders that may be 
passed in this suit and in payment of the amount which the Court may adjudge due to defend ant No. 2 in 
respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable to plaintiff 
under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV 
of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908; and that the balance, if any, shall applied in 
payment of the amount due to the plaintiff and that, if any balance be left, it shall be paid defendant          
No. 1 or other persons entitled to receive the same; and  
(iv) that, if the money realised b y such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the amounts 
due to defendant No. 2 and the plaintiff, defendant No. 2 or the plaintiff or both of them, as the case may 
be, shall be at liberty (when such remedy is open under the terms of their re spective mortgages and is not 
barred by any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against defendant No. 1 for 
the amounts remaining due to them respectively.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed, —  
(a) that, if the plai ntiff pays into Court to the credit of this suit the amount adjudged due to 
defendant No. 2 but defendant No. 1 makes default in the payment of the said amount, the plaintiff shall 
be at liberty to apply to the Court to keep defendant No. 2 ’s mortgage aliv e for his benefit and to apply 
for final decree ( in the same manner as the defendant No. 2 might have done under clause 4 above )— 
*[(i) that defendant No. 1 shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and 
from all right to redeem the mort gaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and 
shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property]; or  
*[(ii) that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the  purposes 
of such sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property;] and  
(b) (if on the application of defendant No. 2 such a final decree for fore closure is passed), that the 
whole of the liability of defendant No. 1 arising from the plaintiff’s mortgage or from the mortgage of 
defendant No. 2 or from this suit shall be deemed to have been discharged and extinguished.  
6. And it is hereby further ord ered and decreed ( in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 5 
above )—  
(i) that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after 
deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the amount paid by the plaintiff in 
respect of defendant No. 2 ’s mortgage and the cost of the suit in connection therewith and in payment 
of the amount which the Court may adjudge due in respect of subsequent interest on the said amount; 
and that the balance, if any, shal l then be applied in payment of the amount adjudged due to the 
plaintiff in respect of his own mortgage under this decree and any further orders that may be passed 
and in payment of the amount which the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the  suit 
and such costs, charges and expenses as may by payable to the plaintiff under rule 10, together with 
such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the bal ance, if any, shall be paid to defendant No. 1 or 
other persons entitled to receive the same; and  
 
 
 
* Words not required to be deleted  
 287 
  
(ii) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the 
amount due in respec t of defendant No. 2 ’s mortgage or the plaintiff's mortgage, defendant No. 2 
shall be at liberty (where such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not 
barred by any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree agai nst defendant No. 1 
for the amount of the balance.  
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court 
from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give 
such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 11  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR SALE  
Plaintiff  . . . . . . . Sub or derivative mortgagee  
vs. 
[Defendant No. 1  . . . . . .  Mortgagor,  
Defendant No. 2  . . . . . .  Original Mo rtgagee.]  
 
 (Order XXXIV, rule 4)  
(Title)  
This suit coming on the ………….…….. day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to 
defendant No. 2 on his mortgage calculated up to this ………………… day of ……………. is the sum of 
Rs. …………..….  for principal, the sum of Rs. ……………… for interest on the said principal, the sum 
of Rs. …………….. for costs, charges  and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the 
mortgage -security together with interest thereon and the sum of Rs. …………… for the costs of the  suit 
awarded to defendant No. 2, making in all the sum of Rs. ……………  
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due from defendant No. 2 to the 
plaintiff in respect of his mortgage. ) 
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows: —  
(i) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before the said ………… day of ………… or any 
later date of up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. ………. 
due to defendant No. 2;  
(Similar declarations to be introduced with  regard to the amount due to the plaintiff, defendant No. 2 
being at liberty to pay such amount. ) 
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared due to defendant No. 2 by defendant No. 1 in the 
manner prescribed in clause 2 ( i) and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of 
such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges 
and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be 
payable under rule 11, of  Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
the plaintiff and defendant No. 2 shall bring into Court all documents in their possession or power 
relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all such documents ( except such as 
relate only to the sub -mortgage) shall be delivered over to defendant No. 1, or to such person as he 
appoints, and defendant No. 2 shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the property to defendant 
No. 1 free from the said mortgage cl ear of and from all encumbrances created by defendant No. 2 or 
any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims, and free from all liability 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Schedule, for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be de leted.  
 288 
 arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to defendant No. 1 qui et and 
peaceable possession of the said property; and  
(iii) that, upon payment into the Co urt by defendant No. 1 of the amount due to defendant No. 2 
the plaintiff shall be at liberty to apply for payment to him of the sum declared due to him together 
with any subsequent costs of the suit and other costs, charges and expenses, as may be payable under 
rule 10, together with such subsequent interests as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of 
the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; an d that the balance, if any, shall then be  
paid to defendant No. 2; and that if the amount paid into the Court be not sufficient to pay in full the 
sum due to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be at liberty (if such remedy is open to him by the terms of 
the mortgage and is not barred by any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree 
against as defendant No. 2 for the amount of the balance.  
3. And it is further ordered and decreed that if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of  this 
suit the amount adjudged due to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall bring into the Court all documents, etc., 
[as in sub -clause ( ii) of clause 2].  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment by defendant Nos. 1 and 2 
as aforesaid, the plaintiff may apply to the Court for a final decree for sale, and on such application being 
made the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and that for the 
purposes of such sale the plaintiff and defe ndant No. 2 shall produce before the Court or such officer as it 
appoints, all documents in their possession or power relating to the mortgaged property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid int o 
Court and be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the 
amount due to the plaintiff as specified in clause 1 above with such costs of the suit and other costs, charges  
and expenses as may be payable under  rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of order) X XXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the 
balance, if any, shall be applied in payment of the amount due to defendant No. 2; an d that, if any balance 
be left, it shall be paid to defendant No. 1 or other persons entitled to receive the same.  
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient for payment in full of the a mounts payable to the plaintiff and defendant No. 2, the plaintiff or 
defendant No. 2, or both of them, as the case may be, shall be at liberty (if such remedy is open under 
their respective mortgages and is not barred by any law for the time being in forc e) to apply for a personal 
decree against defendant No. 2 or defendant No. 1 (as the case may be) for the amount of the balance.  
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of 
this suit the amount adjudged due to the plaintiff, but defendant No. 1 makes default in payment of the 
amount due to defendant No. 2, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree 
for foreclosure or sale (as the case may be) —(declarations in the  ordinary form to be introduced 
according to the nature of defendant No. 2’s mortgage and the remedies open to him thereunder ). 
8. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court as 
they may have occasion,  and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it 
thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ]  
No. 12  
DECREE FOR RECTIFICATION OF INSTRUMENT  
(Title) 
IT is hereby declared that ……………. , dated the ……………. day of  …………… 20 ….... , does 
not truly express the intention of the parties to such …………………….  
And it is decreed that the said ……………….. be rectified by …………………..    
 
Here insert name of proper officer.  289 
  
No. 13  
DECREE TO SET ASIDE A TRANSFER IN FRAUD OF CREDITORS  
(Title) 
IT is hereby declared that the …………… , dated the …………… day of ………. 20 …….. , and 
made between …………… and ……….. , is void as against the plaintiff and all other the creditors, if any, 
of the defendant  
No. 14  
INJUNCTION AGAINST PRIVATE  NUISANCE  
(Title) 
LET the defendant ………………. , his agents, servants and workmen, be perpetually restrained from 
burning, or causing to be burnt, any bricks on the defendant’s plot of land marked B in the annexed plan, 
so as to occasion a nuisance to the plaintiff as the own er or occupier of the dwelling -house and garden 
mentioned in the plaint as belonging to and being occupied by the plaintiff.  
No. 15  
INJUNTION AGAINST BUILDING HIGHER THAN OLD LEVEL  
(Title) 
LET the defendant …………….. , his contractors, agents and workmen, be  perpetually restrained 
from continuing to erect upon his pr emises ………………… any house or building of a greater h eight 
than the buildings which formerly stood upon his said premises and which have been recently pulled down, 
so or in such manner as to darken,  injure or obstruct such of the plaintiff ’s windows in his said premises as 
are ancient lights.  
No.16  
INJUNCTION RESTRAINING USE OF PRIVATE ROAD  
(Title) 
LET the defendant …………….. his agents, servants and workmen, be perpetually restrained from 
using or per mitting to be used and part of the lane at …………… , the soil of which belongs to the 
plaintiff, as a carriage -way for the passage of carts, carriages or other vehicles, either going to or from the 
land marked B in the annexed plan or for any purpose whatsoe ver. 
No. 17  
PRELIMINARY DECREE IN AN ADMINISTRATION -SUIT  
(Title) 
IT is ordered that the following accounts and inquiries be taken and made; that is to say : —  
In creditor ’s suit —  
1. That an account be taken of what is due to the plaintiff and all other th e creditors of the deceased.  
In suits by legatees —  
2. That an accounts be taken of the legacies given by the testators will , 
In suits by next -of-kin— 
3. That an inquiry be made and account taken of what or of what share, if any, the plaintiff is entitled 
to as next -of-kin [or one of the next -of-kin] of the intestate.  
[After the first paragraph, the decree will, where necessary, order, in a creditor’s suit, inquiry and 
accounts for legatees, heirs -at-law and next -of-kin. In suits by claimants other than cre ditors, after the 290 
 first paragraph, in all cases, an order to inquire and take an account of creditors will follow the first 
paragraph and such of the others as may be necessary will follow, omitting the first formal words. The 
form is continued as in a cre ditor's suit.]  
4. An account of the funeral and testamentary expenses.  
5. An account of the movable property of the deceased come to the hands of the defendant, or to the 
hands of any other person by his order or for his use.  
6. An inquiry what part (if an y) of the movable property of the deceased is outstanding and 
undisposed of.  
7. And it is further ordered that the defendant do, on or before the  day of  next, pay into, Court  
all sums of money which shall be found to have come to his hands, or to the hand s of any person by his 
order or for his use.  
8. And that if the ………….. *  shall find it necessary for carrying out the objects of the suit to sell 
any part of the movable property of the deceased that the same be sold accordingly, and the proceeds paid 
into Court.  
9. And that Mr. E. F. be receiver in the suit ( or proceeding) and receive and get in all outstanding 
debts and outstanding movable property of the deceased, and pay the same into the hands of the ……….. 
*(and shall give security by bond for the due performance of his duties to the amount of ……….. rupees).  
10. And it is further ordered that if the movable property of the deceased be found insufficient for 
carrying out the objects of the suit, then the following further inquiries be made, and accounts taken, that 
is to say —  
(a) an inquiry what immovable property the deceased was seized of or entitled to at the time of 
his death;  
(b) an inquiry what are the encumbrances (if any) affecting the immovable property of the 
deceased or any part thereof;  
(c) an account, so far as possible, of what is due to the several incumbrancers, and to include a 
statement of the priorities of such of the incumbrancers as shall consent to the sale hereinafter 
directed.  
11. And that the immovable property of the deceased, or  so much thereof as shall be necessary to 
make up the fund in Court sufficient to carry out the object of the suit, be sold with the approbation of the 
Judge, free from incumbrances (if any) of such incumbrancers as shall consent to the sale and subject to  
the incumbrances of such of them as shall not consent.  
12. And it is ordered that G. H. shall have the conduct of the sale of the immovable property, and 
shall prepare the conditions and contracts of sale subject to the approval of the …………… *  and that in  
case any doubt or difficulty shall arise the papers shall be submitted to the Judge to settle.  
13. And it is further ordered that, for the purpose of the inquiries hereinbefore directed, the ………. 
*shall advertise in the newspapers according to the practic e of the Court, or shall make such inquiries in 
any other way which shall appear to the …....……….. *to give the most useful publicity to such inquiries.  
14. And it is ordered that the above inquiries and accounts be made and taken, and that all other acts 
ordered to be done be completed, before the day of ……………. and that the ………………*  do certify 
the result of the injuries, and the accounts, and that all other acts ordered are completed, and have his 
certificate in that behalf ready for the inspection of the p arties on the ……………. day of   …………..  
 
 
* Here insert name of proper officer.  291 
  
15. And, lastly, it is ordered that this suit [or proceedings] stand adjourned for making final decree to 
the day of …………………….  
[Such part only of this decree is to be used as is applicable to the particular case.]  
No. 18  
FINAL  DECREE IN AN ADMINISTRATION -SUIT BY A LEGATEE  
(Title) 
1. It is ordered that the defendant ………….. do, on or before the ………….. day of ………… pay 
into Court the sum of Rs. ………….. , the balance by the said certifi cate found to be due from the said 
defendant on account of the estate of …………….. , the testator and also the sum of Rs. ……… for 
interest, at the rate of Rs. ……………. per cent. per annum, from the …………….. day of ………….. to 
the …………. day of …………, amounting toge ther to the sum of Rs. ………………..   
2. Let the ………………… * of the said Court tax the costs of the plaintiff and defendant in this suit, 
and let the amount of the said costs, when so taxed, be paid out of the said sum of Rs. ……………. 
ordered to be paid into Court a s aforesaid, as follows: —  
(a) The costs of the plaintiff to Mr. ………………., his attorney [or pleader] or and the costs of 
the defendant to Mr. ……………… , his attorney [or pleader].  
(b) And ( if any debts are due ) with the residue of the said sum of Rs. …………….. after payment 
of the plaintiff’s and defendant's costs as aforesaid let the sums, found to be owing to the several 
creditors mentioned in the schedule to the certificate, of the ………….. .*, together with subsequent 
interest on such of the debts as bear inte rest, be paid; and, after making such payments, let the amount 
coming to the several legatees mentioned in the ………………. schedule, together with subsequent 
interest (to be verified as aforesaid), be paid to them.  
3. And if there should then be any residue, l et the same be paid to the residuary legatee.  
No. 19  
PRELIMINARY DECREE IN AN ADMINISTRATION -SUIT BY A LEGATEE, WHERE AN EXECUTOR IS HELD 
PERSONALLY LIABLE FOR THE PAYMENT OF LEGACIES  
(Title) 
1. IT is declared that the defendant is personally liable to pay  the legacy of Rs. ………… bequeathed  
to the plaintiff. —  
2. And it is ordered that an account be taken of what is due for principal and interest on the said 
legacy.  
3. And it is also ordered that the defendant do, within …………….. weeks after the date of the  
certificate of the ……..…… *, pay to the plaintiff the amount of what the ………………. *  shall certify 
to be due for principal and interest.  
4. And it is ordered that the defendant do pay the plaintiff his costs of suit, the same to be taxed in 
case the parties  differ.  
 
 
* Here insert name of proper officer.  292 
  
No. 20  
FINAL DECREE IN AN ADMINISTRATION -SUIT BY NEXT -OF-KIN 
(Title) 
1. L ET the …………….. *  of the said Court tax the costs of the “plaintiff and defendant in this suit, 
and let the amount of the said plaint iff’s costs, when so taxed, be paid by the defendant to the plaintiff out 
of the sum of Rs. ……………. , the balance, by the said certificate found to be due from the said 
defendant on account of the personal estate of E.F., the intestate , within one week afte r the taxation of the 
said costs by the said ……………….. *and let the defendant retain for her own use out of such sum her 
costs, when taxed.  
2. And it is ordered that the residue of the said sum of Rs. ………………… after payment of the 
plaintiff’s and defendant’s  costs as aforesaid, be paid and applied by defendant as follows: —  
(a) Let the defendant, within one week after the taxation of the said costs by the *  ……………. as 
aforesaid, pay one -third share of the said residue to the plaintiffs A.B., and C.D., his wife , in her right 
as the sister and one of the next -of-kin of the said E.F., the intestate . 
(b) Let the defendant retain for her own use one other third share of said residue, as the mother 
and one of the next -of-kin of the said E.F., the intestate . 
(c) And l et the defendant, within one week after the taxation of the said costs by the *………….. 
as aforesaid, pay the remaining one -third share of the said residue to G . H., as the brother and the 
other next - of-kin of the said E.F. the intestate . 
No. 21  
PRELIMINARY  DECREE IN A SUIT FOR DISSOLUTION OF PARTNERSHIP AND THE TAKING OF PARTNERSHIP 
ACCOUNTS  
(Title) 
IT is declared that the proportionate shares of the parties in the partnership are as follows: —  
It is declared that this partnership shall stand dissolved [or shall be deemed to have been dissolved] as 
from the ………….. day of ………… and it is ordered that the dissolution thereof as from that day be 
advertised in the …………………. Gazette, etc.  
And it is ordered that ……………… be the receiver of the partnership -estate and e ffects in this suit 
and do get in all the outstanding book -debts and claims of the partnership.  
And it is ordered that the following accounts be taken: — 
1.  An account of the credits, property and effects now belonging to the said partnership;  
2. An accoun t of the debts and liabilities of the said partnership;  
3. An account of all dealings and transactions between the plaintiff and defendant, from the foot of 
the settled account exhibited in this suit and marked (A), and not disturbing any subsequent settle d 
accounts.  
And it is ordered that the goodwill of the business heretofore carried on by the plaintiff and defendant 
as in the plaint mentioned; and the stock -in-trade, be sold on the premises, and that the ………….. *may, 
on the application of any of the par ties, fix a reserved bidding for all or any of the lots at such sale, and 
that either of the parties is to be at liberty to bid at the sale.  
And it is ordered that the above accounts be taken, and all the other acts required to be done be 
completed, before  the ……….. day of ……… , and that the * ……….. do certify the result of the 
accounts, and that all other acts are completed, and have his certificate in that behalf ready for the 
inspection of the parties on the day of ……….. And, lastly, it is ordered that t his suit stand adjourned for 
making a final decree to the ………. day of …………  
 
* Here insert name of proper officer.  293 
  
No. 22  
FINAL DECREE IN A SUIT FOR DISSOLUTION OF PARTNERSHIP AND THE TAKING OF PARTNERSHIP ACCOUNT  
(Title) 
IT is ordered that the fund now i n Court, amounting to the sum of Rs. …………… , be applied as 
follows: —  
1. In payment of the debts due by the partnership set forth in the certificate of the * ………...….. 
amounting the whole to Rs. ……………  
2. In payment of the costs of all parties in this suit,  amounting to Rs. ……………….. [ These 
costs must be ascertained before the decree is drawn up .] 
3. In payment of the sum of Rs. …………… to the plaintiff as his share of the partnership -assets, 
of the sum of Rs. …………….. , being the residue of the said sum of Rs. …………. now in Court, to 
the defendant as his share of the partnership -assets.  
[Or, And that the remainder of the said sum of Rs. …………… be paid to the said plaintiff (or 
defendant) in part payment of the sum of Rs. ……………… certified to be due to him in respec t of 
the partnership -accounts.]  
4. And that the defendant [or plaintiff] do on or before the ………… day of …………. pay to the 
plaintiff [or defendant] the sum of Rs. ………… being the balance of the said sum of Rs …………. 
due to him, which will then remain due.  
No. 23 
DECREE FOR RECOVERY OF LAND AND MESNE  PROFIT  
(Title) 
IT is hereby decreed as follows: — 
1. That the defendant do put the plaintiff in possession of the property specified in the schedule 
hereunto annexed.  
2. That the defendant do pay to the plaintiff t he sum of Rs. ………..... with interest thereon at the 
rate of ……….… per cent. per annum to the date of realization on account of mesne profits which 
have accrued due prior to the institution of the suit.  
Or 
2. Tha t an inquiry be made as to the account of mes ne profits which have accrued due prior to the 
institution of the suit.  
3. That an inquiry be made as to the amount mesne profits from the institution of the suit                
until [the delivery of possession to the decree -holder] [the relinquishment of  possession by the 
judgment -debtor with notice to the decree -holder through the Court] [the expiration of three years 
from the date of the decree].  
 
Schedule  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Here insert name of proper officer.  294 
 APPENDIX  E 
EXECUTION  
No. 1  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE W HY A PAYMENT OR ADJUSTMENT SHOULD NOT BE RECORDED AS CERTIFIED  
(O.21, to r.2.) 
(Title) 
WHEREAS  in execution of the decree in the above -named suit ………......... has applied to this Court 
that the Sum of Rs. …………….. recoverable under the decree has been paid/ adjusted and should be 
recorded as certified, this is to give you notice that you are to appear before this Court on the ………… 
day of ………………. 19 ………………. , to show cause why the payment/adjust ment aforesaid should 
not be recorded as certified.  
GIVEN  under my  hand and the seal of the Court, this ……………….. day of  20.  
Judge . 
No. 2  
PRECEPT  (Section 46)  
(Title) 
Upon hearing the decree -holder it is ordered that this precept be sent to the Court of ……………. at 
………………… under section 46 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908, with directions to attach the 
property specified in the annexed schedule and to hold the same pending any application which may be 
made by the decree -holder for execution of the decree.  
Schedule  
Dated the ………………….. day of …………… 20  
Judge . 
No. 3  
ORDER S ENDING DECREE FOR EXECUTION TO ANOTHER COURT  
(O.21, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
WHEREAS  the decree -holder in the above suit has applied to this Court for a certificate to be sent to 
the Court of ………………… at   ………………… for execution of the decree in the above suit by the 
said Court, alleging that the judgment -debtor resides or has property within the local limits, for the 
jurisdiction of the said Court, and it is deemed necessary and proper to send a certificate to the said Court 
under Order XXI, rule 6, of the Code of Civi l Procedure, 1908, it is.  
Ordered : 
That a copy of this order be sent to ....................... with a copy of the decree and of any order which 
may have been made for execution of the same and a certificate of non -satisfaction.  
Dated the ……………… day of ……… ……… 20 ………….  
Judge . 
No. 4  
CERTIFICATE OF NON -SATISFACTION OF DECREE  
(O.21, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
CERTIFIED  that no1 satisfaction of the decree of this Court in suit No ……………. of ........20  …….. , 
a copy which is hereunto attached, has been obtained by execution within the jurisdiction of this Court.  
Dated the ……………..day of ……………… 20 …………..  
Judge . 
                                                      
1. If partial , strike out “no” and State to what extent.  295 
 No. 5  
CERTIFICATE OF EXECUTION OF DECREE  TRANSFERRED TO ANOTHER COURT  
(O. 21, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
 
Number 
of suit 
and the 
Court by 
which the 
decree 
was 
passed  Names 
of 
partie s Date of 
application 
for execution  Number of 
the 
execution 
case Processes 
issued and 
dates of 
service 
thereof  Costs of 
execution  Amount 
realized  How the 
case is 
disposed 
of Remarks  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
         Rs. N.P. 
 Rs. N.P. 
     
Signature of Muharri r in charge.  
Signature of Judge . 296 
 No. 6  
APPLICATION FOR EXECUTION OF DECREE  
(O.21, r.11. ) 
In the Court of  
I, ……………… decree -holder, hereby apply for execution of the decree herein -below set forth: —  
 No. of Suit  
Names of parties  
Date of Decree  
Whether any a ppeal preferred from decree  
Payment of adjustment made if any  
Previous application, if any, with date and result  
Amount with interest due upon the decree or other relief 
granted thereby together with particulars of any cross decree.  
Amount of costs, if any , awarded  
Against whom to be executed   
 
 
 
Mode in which the assistance of the 
Court is required.  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 789 of 1897  
A.B.  —Plaintiff  
C.D. —Defendant  
October 11, 1897  
No. 
None  
R.s 72 -4-0 recorded on application, dated the 4th March, 
1899  
Rs. 314-8-2 principal [interest at 6 per cent, per annum, from 
date of decree till payment].  
                                                             Rs.     a.      p  
 
As awarded in the decree                    47     10     4  
Subsequently incurred                           8       2     0  
                                           Total          55     12    4  
Against the defendant C.D.   
[When attachment and sale of movable 
property is sought . 
 
 I, Pray that the total amount of Rs. 
[together with interes t on the principal 
sum up to date of payment] and the 
cost of taking out this execution, be 
realised by attachment and sale of 
defendant’s movable property as per 
annexed list and paid to me.  
 
[When attachment and sale of immovable 
property is sought .] 
 
  I Pray that the total amount of Rs. 
[together with interest on the principal 
sum up to date of payment] and the cost 
of taking out this execution, be realised 
by the attachment and sale of 
defendant’s immovable property 
specified at the foot of this applic ation 
and paid to me.]  
 297 
 I ………………… declare that what is stated herein is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.  
                                                                                                              Signed      , decree -holder . 
Dated the ………………….. day of …………….. 20 
[When attachment and sale of immovable property is sought .]  
Description and specification of property  
The undivided one -third share of the judgment -debtor in a house situated in the village of …………. 
value Rs. 40, and  bounded as follows: —  
East by G’s house; west by H’s house; south by public road; north by private lane and J’s 
house.  
I ……………….. declare that what is stated in the above description is true to the best of my 
knowledge and belief, and so far as I have bee n able to ascertain the interest of the defendant in the 
property therein specified.  
           Signed ..................,  decree -holder . 
No. 7   
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY EXECUTION SHOULD NOT ISSUE  
1[(O. 21, r.16. )]  
(Title) 
To  
      
WHEREAS  ………………… has ma de application to this Court for execution of decree in Suit 
No. ……………… of  20…... , on the allegation that the said decree has been transferred to him by 
assignment 2[or without assignment], this is to give you notice that you are to appear before this Cou rt 
……………. on the ………….. day of …………………. 20………………. , to show cause why 
execution should not be granted.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this ............. day of ..............20 .........  
Judge . 
No. 8  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT OF MOVABLE PROPERTY IN  EXECUTION OF A DECREE  
FOR MONEY  (O.21. r. 30. )  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court  
 
WHEREAS  ………..… was ordered by decree of this Court 
passed on the day of …………….… 20 ……………… in Suit 
No. ……………. of............20  ………… , to pay to the plaintiff 
the sum of Rs. ……………… as noted in the margin; and 
whereas the said sum of Rs. ………….. has not been paid; 
These are to command you to attach the movable property of 
the said …………  as set forth in the schedule hereunto annexed, 
or which shall be pointed out to you by the said …………... , 
and unless the said ………….. shall pay to you the said sum of 
Rs. ……………… together with Rs. ……………. , the cost of 
this attachment, to hold the same until fur ther orders from this 
Court.
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “(O. 21, r. 22).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  Decree     
Principal  
Interest  
Costs  
Cost of execution  
Further interest  
 
Total     
   298 
 You are further commanded to return this warrant on or before the……………day of…………. 20….  
with an endorsement certifying the day on which and manner in which it has been executed, or why it has 
not been executed.  
GIVEN  under my h and and the seal of the Court, this…………day of……….. 20....... 
Schedule  
Judge.  
No. 9  
WARRANT FOR SEIZURE OF SPECIFIC MOVABLE PROPERTY ADJUDGED BY DECREE  
(O. 21, r. 31.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court , 
WHEREAS ………………….was ordered by decree of this Court pa ssed on the………………  day 
of……...... 20…………, in Suit No…………of  20….., to deliver  to the plaintiff the movable property (or 
a……….share in the movable property) specified in the schedule hereunto annexed, and whereas the said  
property ( or share) has not been deli vered.  
These are to command you to seize the said movable property ( or a………share of the said movable 
property) and to deliver it to the plaintiff or to such person as he may appoint in his behalf.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………..day  of……………… 20............  
Schedule  
Judge.  
No. 10  
NOTICE TO STATE OBJECTIONS TO DRAFT OF DOCUMENT   
(O. 21, r. 34.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
TAKE notice that on the……..day of……… 20……., …………………………the decree -holder in the 
above suit presented an application to this Court that  the Court may execute on your behalf a deed of…… 
whereof a draft is hereunto annexed, of the immovable property specified hereunder , and that 
the……..day of…………….. 20……, is appointed for the hearing of the said application, and that you are 
at liberty  
to appear on the said day and to state in writing any objections to the said draft.  
Description of property  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of ............. 20...........  
Judge.  
 
No. 11  
WARRANT TO THE BAILIFF TO GIVE POSSESSION OF LAN D, ETC.  
(O.21, r. 35.)  
(T i t l e ) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS  the undermentioned property in the occupancy of……………………...has been decreed to  299 
 …………, the plaintiff in this suit; you are hereby directed to put the said………………in possession of  
the same, and  you are hereby authorized to remove any person bound by the decree who may refuse to 
vacate the same.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ................................ ...... day of  ......................  20...........  
Schedule  
J u d g e . 
No. 12  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY WARRANT OF ARREST SHOULD NOT  ISSUE 
(O. 21, r. 37.)  
(Title ) 
To 
 
WHEREAS   ................................ ..............  has made application to this Court for execution of decree in Suit No.  
................................ ....of 20 ..........................  by arrest and imprisonment of your person, you are hereby required to  
appear before this Court on the  ................................ ... day of  ......................  20 ............................  , to show cause why  
you s hould not be committed to the civil prison in execution of the said decree.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ................................ day of  ............................... 20........  
J udg e.  
No. 13  
WARRANT OF ARREST IN EXECUTION  
(O. 21, r. 38.)  
(Title ) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS  …. ........... was adjudged by a decree of this Court in suit No  ..................  of .....................   20.... , dated  
Decree     the………….day of…………… 20………….,to pay to the decree -  
holder the sum of Rs…………as noted in the margin, and whereas  
the said sum of Rs…………...has not been paid to the said decree - 
holde r in satisfaction of the said decree, these are to 
command you to arrest the said judgement -debtor and unless 
the said judgment -debtor shall pay to you the said sum of Rs……  
together with Rs……………for the cost of executing this process,  
to bring the said def endant before the Court with all convenient 
speed.  
You are further commanded to return this warrant on or before  
the………………day of……………….. 20…………….....,with an  
endorsement certifying the day on which and manner in which it 
has been executed, or the reason wh y it has not been executed.  Principal     
Interest     
Costs     
Execution  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Total     
   
   
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ................................ . day of  ...............................  20……………  
Judge.  
No. 14  
WARRANT OF COMMITTAL OF JUDGEMENT -DEBTOR TO JAIL  
(O.21, r. 30.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at   
WHEREAS……………………………………...   who has been brought before this Court this……………………… ……day  
 300 
 of………………. 20…………, under a warrant in execution of a decree which was made and pronounced by the said  
Court on the  ................................ ... day of  ................................ .20…………., and by which decree it was ordered that the  
said……………………..  should  pay  ............................... ; And whereas the said…………………………… has not obeyed  
the decree nor satisfied the Court that he is entitled to be discharged from custody; You are hereby 1*** 
commanded and required to take and receive the said…………………into the civil prison and keep him 
imprisoned therein for a period not exceeding……………...or until the said decree shall be fully satisfied, 
or the said………………….shall be otherwise entitled to be released according to terms a nd provisions of 
section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and the Court does hereby fix 2*** per diem as the rate  of the 
monthly allowance for the subsistence of the said………..during his confinement under this warrant  
of committal.  
GIVEN  under my s ignature and the seal of the Court, this…………day of…………… 20……..    
Judge.  
No. 15  
ORDER FOR THE RELEASE OF A PERSON IMPRISONED IN EXECUTION OF A DECREE   
(Sections 58, 59)  
(Title) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at  
UNDER  orders passed this day, you are her eby directed to set free…………………..judgment -debtor 
now in your custody.  
Dated  
Judge.  
No. 16  
ATTACHMENT IN EXECUTION  
PROHIBITORY ORDER, WHERE THE PROPERTY TO BE ATTACHED CONSISTS OF MOVABLE PROPERTY TO WHICH THE  
DEFENDANT IS ENTITLED SUBJECT TO A LIEN OR RIG HT OF SOME OTHER PERSON TO THE IMMEDIATE POSSESSION THEREOF   
(O. 21, r. 46.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS ………………………………………………………...has failed to satisfy a decree passed 
against……………on the………………...day of……………………. 20……….., in Suit No.……of ...... 
20…, in favour of………….for Rs…………………..;  
It is ordered that the defendant be, and is hereby, prohibited and restrained until the further order 
of this Court, from receiving from……………the following property in the possession of the said,  
...............that is to say,…………………………..to whi ch the defendant is entitled, subject to any claim of 
the said……………, and the said………  is hereby prohibited and restrained, until the further  
order of this Court, from delivering the said property to any person or persons whomsoever.  
GIVEN  under my hand and  the seal of Court, this………………….day of…………. 20……………….  
Judge.   
                                                      
1. The words “in the name of the King -Emperor of India,” omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
2. The word “annas” omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  301 
 1[No. 16A  
AFFIDAVIT OF ASSETS TO BE MADE BY A JUDGMENT -DEBTOR  
ORDER XXI, RULE 41( 2)] 
In the Court of  
A.B…………………………..                                                                                                 Decree -holder  
Vs. 
C……………………………                                                                                                 Judgment -debtor  
I         of 
state on oath
solemn  affirmation as follows: — 
1. My full name is …………………………………  
                                             (Block capitals)  
2. I live at  
*3. I am ...........................  married  
    single  
    widower (widow)  
     divorced  
4. The following persons are dependent upon me: — 
5. My employment, trade or profession is tha t of....................  
carried on by me at  ....................  
I am a director of the following companies: — 
6. My present annual/monthly/weekly income, after paying income -tax, is as follows: — 
(a) From my employment, trade or profession Rs.  ............ ........  
(b) From other sources Rs.  ....................  
*7. (a) I own the house in which I live; its value is Rs.  ....................  
I pay as outgoings by way of rates, mortgage, interest, etc., the annual sum of Rs.  ....................  
(b) I pay as re nt the annual sum of Rs.  ....................  
8. I possess the following: — 
(a) Banking accounts;                       
(b) Stocks and shares;  
(c) Life and endowment policies;  
(d) House property;  Give particulars  
(e) Other property;   
(f) Other securities;  
9. The following debts are due to me: — 
(give particulars)  
(a) From       of  
Rs. 
(b) From        of  
       Rs.                (etc.)  
Sworn before me, etc.]   
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*Strike off the words which are not applicable . 302 
 No. 17 
ATTACHMENT IN EXECUTION  
PROHIBITORY ORDER WHERE THE PROPERTY CONSISTS OF DEBTS NOT SECURED  
BY NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS  
(O. 21, r. 46.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS………………………... has failed to satisfy a decree passed against…………………….........on  
the…………….day of……… 20……….., in Suit No……….of   20…………., in favour of……for  
Rs…………; it is ordered that the defendant be, an d is hereby, prohibited and restrained, until the further 
order of this Court, from receiving from you a certain debt alleged now to be due from you to the said 
defendant, namely,………… and that you, the said……………...  be, and you are hereby, prohibited and  
restrained, until the further order of this Court, from making payment of the said debt, or any part thereof, 
to any person whomsoever or otherwise than into this Court.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………..day of………. 20…………    
Judge.  
No. 18 
ATTACHMENT IN EXECUTION PROHIBITORY ORDER, WHERE THE PROPERTY CONSISTS OF SHARES IN THE 
CAPITAL OF A CORPORATION  
(O. 21, r. 46.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
Defendant and to……………………., Secretary of Corporation.  
WHEREAS……….. has failed to satisfy a decree passed against… ……………..on the…………….day 
of……… 20……, in Suit No……………of   20…….., in favour of……………….., for Rs……………….; 
it is ordered that you, the defendant, be, and you are hereby, prohibited and restrained, until the further 
order of this Court, from making and transfer of…… ………...shares in the aforesaid corporation, 
namely,……….  or from receiving payment of any dividends thereon; and you,………,the Secretary of the  
said Corporation, are hereby prohibited and restrained from permitting any such transfer or making any 
such payment . 
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of………… 20……..    
Judge.  
No. 19  
ORDER TO ATTACH SALARY OF PUBLIC OFFICER OR SERVANT OF RAILWAY COMPANY OR LOCAL AUTHORITY  
(O. 21, r. 48.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
WHEREAS ……………………, judgment -debtor in the above -named case; is a ( describe office of 
judgment -debtor ) receiving his salary (or allowances) at your hands; and whereas………………, decree -
holder in the said case, has applied in this Court for the attachment of the salary (or allowances ) 
of the said……………to the ext ent of…………due to him under the decree; You are hereby required to 303 
 withhold the said sum of………..from the salary of the said……..in monthly instalments of …… and to   
remit the said sum (or monthly instalments) to this Court.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this……….day of………… 20..............  
J u d g e .  
No. 20  
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT OF NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT  
(O.  21,  r.  51.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court,  
WHEREAS  an order has been passed by this Court on the……………..day of……….20……….., for  
the attachme nt of…………; You are hereby directed to seize the said…………………and bring the same  
into Court.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………….day of……………20……….    
Judge.  
No. 21  
ATTACHMENT  
PROHIBITORY ORDER, WHERE THE PROPERTY CONSISTS OF MONEY OR OF AN Y SECURITY IN THE CUSTODY 
OF A COURT OF JUSTICE OR 1[PUBLIC  OFFICER ] 
(O. 21, r. 52.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
Sir, 
The plaintiff having applied, under rule 52 of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for an 
attachment of certain money now in yours hands (here  state how the money is supposed to be in the hands 
of the person addressed, on what account, etc.), I request that you will hold the said money subject to the 
further order of this Court.  
I have the honour to be,  
                                                                                                                             Sir 
Your most obedient Servant.  
Dated the……….day of……… 20………                                                                                   Judge.  
No. 22  
NOTICE OF ATTACHM ENT OF A DECREE TO THE COURT WHICH PASSED IT  
(O. 21, r. 53.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Judge of the Court of ................  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “Officer of Government”.  304 
 Sir, 
I have the honour to inform you that the decree obtained in your Court on the  ……………………day  
of…........ ………. 20………..by…………….in Suit No…………of  20................... ..in which he 
was……….………and  ………….was…………has been attached by this Court on the application 
of…………………….,  the……….in the suit specified above. You are therefore requested to stay the 
execution of the decree of your Court until you receive  an intimation from this Court that the present 
notice has been cancelled or until execution of the said decree is applied for by the holder of the decree 
now sought to be executed or by his judgment -debtor.  
I have the honour, etc.  
Judge.  
Dated the……………….d ay of…….20………..  
No. 23  
NOTICE OF ATTACHMENT OF A DECREE TO THE HOLDER OF THE DECREE  
(O. 21, r. 53.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
WHEREAS an application has been made in this Court by the decree -holder in the above suit for the 
attachment of a decree obtained by you on the… …… .................. ..day of……. .....20........ ...................... ., in 
the Court of……………….in Suit  No…….of  20.......... , in which………….was………….and……….was 
……………………;  It is ordered that you, the said………..., be, and you are hereby, prohibited and 
restrained, until the further order of this Court, from transferring or charging the same in any way.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this……….day of………….20………….    
Judge.  
No. 24  
ATTACHMENT IN EXECUTION  
PROHIBITORY ORDER, WHERE THE PROPERTY CONSISTS OF IM MOVABLE PROPERTY  
(O. 21, r. 54.)  
(Title) 
To 
    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Defendant  
WHEREAS  you have failed to satisfy a decree passed against you on the……………………….........day 
of………….. 20……….., in Suit No………. of……… 20..............  , in favour of………………………for 
Rs…………; It is ordered that you, the said………….., be, and you are hereby, prohibited and restrained,  
until the further order of this Court, from transferring or charging the property specified in the Sc hedule 
hereunto annexed, by sale, gift or otherwise, and that all persons be, and that they are hereby, prohibited  from 
receiving the same by purchase, or gift otherwise.  
1[It is also ordered that you should attend Court on the…………………………………………….day 
of ………… ..20………, to take notice of the date fixed for settling the terms of the proclamation of 
sale.]  
GIVEN  under my hand and seal of the Court, this…………day of………20………….    
Schedule  
Judge.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  305 
 No. 25  
ORDER FOR PAYMENT TO THE PLAINTIFF, ETC., OF MONEY, ETC., IN THE HA NDS OF A THIRD PARTY  
(O.21, r. 56.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS  the following property.....................................has been attached in execution of a decree in 
Suit No……………….of  20………, passed on the……………day of  20.........  , in favour of………..for 
Rs.......... .............. ………………….It is ordered that the property so attached, consisting of 
Rs…………….in money and Rs ......…………..in currency -notes, or a sufficient part thereof to satisfy the 
said decree, shall be paid over by you, the said…………..to………….    
GIVEN  under m y hand and the seal of the Court, this……………………day of………20 ..........  
Judge.  
No. 26  
NOTICE TO ATTACHING CREDITOR   
(O. 21, r. 58.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
WHEREAS …………………………...has made application to this Court for the removal of attachment  
on………….placed at your instance in execution of the decree in Suit No………………of………  20.........  
this is to give you notice to appear before this Court on………….., the………….day of……..20………...,  
either in person or by a pleader of the Court duly instructed to support your claim, as attaching cre ditor.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………..day of……….20. ..........  
Judge.  
No. 27  
WARRANT OF SALE OF PROPERTY IN EXECUTION OF A DECREE FOR MONEY  
(O. 21, r. 66.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
THESE  are to command you to sell by auc tion, after giving…………day's previous notice, by affixing 
the same in this Court -house, and after making due proclamation, the…………..property attached under a 
warrant from this Court, dated the…………day of 20 ................  , in execution of a decree in favou r 
of……………in Suit No………….of    20............, or so much of the said property as shall realize the sum 
of Rs…………………... , being the………………of the said decree and costs still remaining unsatisfied.  
You are further commanded to return this warrant on or before th e………….day of………….  …….20 
with an endorsement certifying the manner in which it has been executed, or the reason  why it has  not been 
executed.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………..day of………20 ........... 
Judge.  306 
 No. 28  
NOTICE OF THE DAY FI XED FOR SETTLING A  SALE PROCLAMATION  
(O. 21, r. 66.)  
(Title) 
To 
.........................................................................................................  Judgment -debtor.  
WHEREAS  in the above -named suit……………………….., the decree -holder, has ap plied for the sale 
of………………  You are hereby informed……………………that the…………..day of…………  20       ,  
has been fixed for settling the terms of the proclamation of sale.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………… day of…………20………    
Judge . 
No. 29  
PROCL AMATION OF SALE  
(O. 21, r. 66)  
(Title) 
(1) Suit No………………….of 20……….., decided by the………..of………in which was plaintiff 
and was defendant. —Notice is hereby given that, under rule 64 of Order XXI of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, an order has been passed by this Court for the sale of the attached property mentioned in 
the annexed schedule, in satisfaction of the claim of the decree -holder in the suit ( 1) mentioned in the 
margin, amounting with costs and interest up -to date of sale to the sum of………………………….  
The sale will be by public auction, and the property will be put up for sale in the lots specified in the 
schedule. The sale will be of the property of the judgment -debtors above -named as mentioned in the 
schedule below; and the liabilities and claims atta ching to the said property, so far as they have been 
ascertained, are those specified in the schedule against each lot.  
In the absence of any order of postponement, the sale will be held by……………..at the monthly sale 
commencing at ........... O’clock  on the… …………at………….... , In the event, however, of the  
debt above specified and of the costs of the sale being tendered or paid before the knocking down of any 
lot, the sale will be stopped.  
At the sale the public generally are invited to bid, either personally or  by duly authorized agent. No bid 
by, or on behalf of, the judgment -creditors above -mentioned, however, will be accepted, nor will any sale to 
them be valid without the express permission of the Court previously given. The following are the further.  
Condit ions of sale  
1. The particulars specified in the schedule below have been stated to the best of the information of the 
Court, but the Court will not be answerable for any error, mis -statement or omission in this proclamation.  
2. The amount by which the bid dings are to be increased shall be determined by the officer 
conducting the sale. In the event of any dispute arising as to the amount bid, or as to the bidder, the lot 
shall at once be again put up to auction.  
3. The highest bidder shall be declared to be  the purchaser of any lot, provided always that he is 
legally qualified to bid, and provided that it shall be in the discretion of the Court or officer holding the 
sale to decline acceptance of the highest bid when the price offered appears so clearly inad equate as to 
make it advisable to do so.  
4. For reasons recorded, it shall be in the discretion of the officer conducting the sale to adjourn it 
subject always to the provisions of rule 69 of Order XXI.  307 
 5. In the case of movable property, the price of each  lot shall be paid at the time of sale or as soon 
after as the officer holding the sale directs, and in default of payment the property shall forthwith be again 
put up and re -sold.  
6. In the case of immovable property, the person declared to be the purchas er shall pay immediately 
after such declaration a deposit of 25 per cent. on the amount of his purchase -money to the officer 
conducting the sale, and in default of such deposit the property shall forthwith be put up again and           
re-sold.  
7. The full  amount of the purchase -money shall be paid by the purchaser before the Court closes on 
the fifteenth day after the sale of the property, exclusive of such day, or if the fifteenth day be a Sunday or 
other holiday, then on the first office day after the fi fteenth day.  
8. In default of payment of the balance of purchase -money within the period allowed, the property 
shall be re -sold after the issue of a fresh notification of sale . The deposit, after defraying the expenses of 
the sale, may, if the Court thinks  fit, be forfeited to Government and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit 
all claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may be subsequently sold.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………….day of……….20……..    
Judge.  
Schedul e of Property  
 
Number of  
lot Description of pro - 
perty to be sold, 
with the name of 
each owner where 
there are more 
judgment - debtors 
than one  The revenue 
assessed upon the 
estate or part of the 
estate, if the 
property to be sold 
is an interest in an 
estate or a part of 
an estate paying  
revenue to  
Government  Detail of 
any 
encum - 
brances to 
which the 
property is  
  liable  Claims, if any,  
which have been put  
forward to the pro -  
perty and any other  
known particulars  
bearing on its  
nature and value  1[The v alue  
of the pro -  
perty as  
stated by the  
decree holder  The value of the  
property as  
stated by the  
judgment -  
debtor.]  
              
              
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  308 
 No. 30  
ORDER ON THE NAZIR FOR CAUSING SERVICE OF PROCLAMATION OF SALE  
(O. 21, r. 66.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
The Nazir of the Court.  
WHEREAS  an order has been made for the sale of the property of the judgment -debtor specified in the 
schedule hereunder annexed, and whereas the………….day of………20 ..........., has been fixed for the 
sale of the said property,………. copies of the proclamation of sale are by this warrant made over to you, 
and you are hereby ordered to have the proclamation published by beat of drum within each of the 
properties specified in the said schedule, to affix a copy of the said proclamation on a cons picuous part of 
each of the said properties and afterwards on the Court -house, and then to submit to this Court a report 
showing the dates on which and the manner in which the proclamations have been published.  
Dated the………….  day of………………20……….    
Schedule  
Judge.  
No. 31  
CERTIFICATE BY OFFICER HOLDING A SALE OF THE DEFICIENCY OF PRICE ON A RE -SALE OF PROPERTY  
BY REASON OF THE PURCHASER'S DEFAULT  
(O. 21, r. 71.)  
(Title)  
Certified that at the re -sale of the property in execution of the decree in the above -named suit, 
in consequence of default on the part of…, purchaser, there was a deficiency in the price of the said 
property amounting to Rs……………………., and that the expenses attending such re -sale amounted to 
Rs…….  , making a total of Rs……………, which sum is reco verable from the defaulter.  
Dated the………….  day of…………  20……..    
Officers holding the sale.  
No. 32  
NOTICE TO PERSON IN POSSESSION OF MOVABLE PROPERTY SOLD IN EXECUTION  
(O.21, r, 79.)  
(Title)  
To 
 
WHEREAS ……………………...has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree  
in the above suit of………..now in your possession, you are hereby prohibited from delivering possession 
of the said…….  to any person except the said………    
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of…………20……..    
Judge . 309 
 No. 33  
PROHIBITORY ORDER AGAINST PAYMENT OF DEBTS SOLD IN EXECUTION  
TO ANY OTHER THAN THE PURCHASER  
(O. 21, r. 79.)  
(Title)  
To 
 
 and to  
 
 
WHEREAS …………… has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree in the 
above suit of…………..  being debts due from you……………to you…………….; It is ordered that you 
....... be, and you are hereby, prohibited from receiving, and you……………………...from making 
payment of,  the said debt to any person or persons except the said…………..  
 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of………..20……..    
Judge.  
No. 34  
PROHIBITORY ORDER AGAINST THE TRANSFER OF SHARE SOLD IN EXECUTION  
(O. 21, r. 79.)  
(Title ) 
To 
       ........................................ and.................................. , Secretary of ......... ................................ Corporation . 
WHEREAS ………….has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree, in the above  
suit, of certain shares in the above Corporation, that is to say, of…………………..standing in the name of 
you……………; It is  ordered that you……………….be, and you are hereby, prohibited from making any  
transfer of the said shares to any person except the said…………………, the purchaser aforesaid, or from 
receiving any dividends thereon; and you……………, Secretary of the said Corporation, from permitting 
any such transfer or making any such payment to any person except the said……………..., the purchaser 
aforesaid.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………..day of …………..20………    
Judge.  
No. 35  
CERTIFICATE TO JUDGMENT -DEBTOR AUTHORISI NG HIM TO MORTGAGE LEASE OR SELL PROPERTY  
(O. 21, r. 83.)  
(Title)  
To 
 
WHEREAS  in excecution of the decree passed in the above suit an order was made on the…………day 
of……………..20…….., for the sale of the under -mentioned property of the judgment -debtor….....,  
and whereas the Court has, on the application of the said judgment -debtor, postponed the said sale to  enable 
him to raise the amount of the decree by mortgage , lease or private sale of the said property or of some 
part thereof:  
This is to certify that the Court doth hereby authorize the said judgment -debtor to make the proposed 
mortgage, lease or sale within a period of……. from the date of this certificate; provided that  all monies  
payable under such mortgage, lease or sale shall be paid into this Court an d not to the said judgment -
debtor.  
 310 
 Description of property  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………  day of………..20…..  
Judge.  
No. 36  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY SALE SHOULD NOT BE SET ASIDE  
(O. 21, rr. 90, 92.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
WHEREAS  the under -ment ioned property was sold on the……….day of……………...  20…….  …...,  in 
execution of the decree passed in the above  named suit, and whereas…………………,  the decree -holder [ or 
judgment -debtor], has applied to this Court to set aside the sale of the said property on the ground of a 
material irregularity [ or fraud ] in publishing [ or conducting] the sale, namely, that…………….  
Take notice that if you have any cause to show why the said application should not be granted, 
you should appear with your proofs in this Court on the…… ……day of…………20........., when the said  
application will be heard and determined.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of………….20……  
Description of property  
Judge.  
 
No. 37  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY SALE SHOULD NOT BE SET ASIDE  
(O. 21, rr . 91, 92.)  
(Title)  
 
To 
 
WHEREAS…………… the purchaser of the under -mentioned property sold on the………………  day of  
……20………, in execution of the decree pa ssed in the above -named suit, has applied to this Court to set  
aside the sale of the said property on the groun d that…………… , the judgment -debtor, had no saleable  
interest therein.   
Take notice that if you have any cause, to show why the said application should not be granted,    you 
should appear with your proofs in this Court on the…………………… day of………… 20......... , when 
the said application will be heard and determined.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of………… 20…….    
Description of property  
Judge.  
No. 38  
CERTIFICATE OF SALE OF LAND  
(O. 21, r. 94.)  
(Title)  
This is to certify that…………………..has been declared the purchaser at a sale by public auction on  
the…………………………day of…………. 20………of………………..in execution of decree in this  
and that the said sale has been duly confirmed by this Court.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of……… …20……    
Judge .   
 311 
 No. 39  
ORDER FOR DELIVERY TO CERTIFIED PURCHASER OF LAND AT A SALE IN EXECUTION  
(O. 21, r. 95.)  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS………………………………….. has become the certified purchaser of………………….. at a  
sale in execution of decree in  Suit No……………of…………….. 20………..; You are hereby ordered  
to put the said……………, the certified purchaser, as aforesaid, in possession of the same.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of………… 20……..    
Judge . 
No. 40  
SUMMONS TO APPEAR AND ANSW ER CHARGE OF  OBSTRUCTING  EXECUTION OF  DECREE  
(O. 21, r. 97.)  
(Title)  
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
WHEREAS ……………………………,the decree -holder in the above suit, has complained to  
this Court that you have resisted (or obstructed) the officer charge d with the execution of the warrant for 
possession:  
You are hereby summoned to appear in this Court on the……………day of…………… 20…….........  
at……………… A.M., to answer the said complaint.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………………………day of………… 20……….  
Judge.  
 
No. 41  
WARRANT OF COMMITTAL  
(O. 21, r. 98.)  
(Title)  
To 
The Officer in Charge of the Jail at……………….. .............................................................    
WHEREAS  the under -mentioned property has been decreed to………………, the plaintiff in th is suit, 
and whereas the Court is satisfied that…………………without any just cause resisted (or obstructed) and 
is still resisting (or obstructing) the said……….. …………….in obtaining possession of the property, and 
whereas the said……………..has made application to t his Court that the said…………….be committed  
to the Civil prison;  
You are hereby commanded and required to take and receive the said…………………... into the civil  
prison and to keep him imprisoned therein for the period of………….days.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the se al of the Court, this………….day of…………………… 20……..  
Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 312 
 No. 42  
AUTHORITY OF THE COLLECTOR TO STAY PUBLIC  SALE OF LAND  
(Section 72)  
(Title)  
To 
           ..Collector of  
SIR, 
In answer to your communication No.………………., dated……………………..representing that th e 
sale in execution of the decree in this suit of…………………………….land situate within your district is  
objectionable, I have the honour to inform you that you are authorised to make provision for the satisfaction of  
 the said decree in the manner recommended b y you.  
I have the honour to be,  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SIR, 
Your obedient servant  
Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  313 
 APPENDIX F  
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
  No. 1 
WARRANT OF ARREST BEFORE JUDGMENT  
(O. 38, r. 1.)  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS ……………………….,  the plaintiff in the above suit, claims the sum of Rs. …………  
 
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this……………………. Day of …………… 20… 
Judge.  
No. 2  
SECURITY FOR APPEARANCE OF A DEFENDANT ARRESTED BEFORE JUDGMENT  
(O. 38, r. 2.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS at the instance of………………., the plaintiff in the a bove  suit,                     the 
defendant, has been arrested and brought before the Court;  
And whereas on the failure of the said defendant to show cause why he should not furni sh security for 
his appearance, the Court has ordered him to furnish such security:  
Therefore I…………………have voluntarily become surety and do hereby bind myself, my heirs and 
executors, to the said Court, that the said defendant shall appear at any time when  called upon while the 
suit is pending and until satisfaction of any decree that may be passed against him in the said suit; and in 
default of such appearance I bind myself, my heirs and executors, to pay to the said Court, at its order, 
any sum of money t hat may be adjudged against the said defendant in the said suit.  
Witness my hand at………………this……………day of…………. 20……..    
(Signed.)  
Witnesses.  
1. 
2. 
     as noted in the margin, and has proved to the satisfaction of the Court  
that there is probable cause for believing that the defendant………………………..  ... 
is about to…………………………………..These are to command you to demand  
and receive from the said ………………………………………………..the sum of  
Rs…………………………………..as sufficient to satisfy the pla intiff's claim, and  
unless the said sum of Rs. ………………………………...is forthwith delivered to  
you by or on behalf of the said……………………………………………to take the  
said……………………………………………into custody, and to bring him before  
this Court, in order that he may show cause why he should not furnish 
security to the amount of Rs. ………………….for his personal 
appearance before the Court, until such time as the said suit shall be 
fully and finally disposed of, and until satisfaction of any decree that 
may be passed against him in the suit.  Principal  
Interest  
 
 
 
Costs  
TOTAL     
   314 
 No. 3  
 
SUMMONS TO  DEFENDANT TO APPEAR ON  SURETY ’S APPLICATION FOR DISCHARGE  
(O . 38, r. 3.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
WHEREAS………………………………… , who became surety on the………………………day of………. 
20….for your appearance in the above suit, has applied to this Court to be discharged from his obligation .        
You are hereby summoned to appear in this Court in person on the…………………………...........day 
of………………20……at……. A. M., when the said application, will be heard and determined.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this……………day of………… 20….. 
Judge.  
No. 4  
ORDER FOR  COMMITTAL  
(O. 38, r. 4.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
WHEREAS ……………………., plaintiff in this suit, has made application to the Court that security be 
taken for the appearance of…………………..., the defendant, to answer any judgment that may be passed 
against him in the suit;  and whereas the Court has called upon the defendant to furnish such security, or to  offer 
a sufficient deposit in lieu of security, which he has failed to do; it is ordered that the said defendant……  
be committed to the civil prison until the decision of the suit; or, if judgment be pronounced against him, 
until satisfaction of the decree.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………….day of……………. 20………  
Judge.  
No. 5  
ATTACHMENT BEFORE  JUDGMENT, WITH  ORDER TO CALL FOR  SECURITY FOR  FULFILMENT OF  DECR EE 
(O. 38, r. 5.)  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS ……………….....has proved to the satisfaction of the Court that the defendant in the above 
suit……….. ; 
These are to command you to call upon the said defendant………………………………..on or before 
the…………….day of…………………. 20………………..either to furnish security for the sum of rupees  
…………… to produce and place at the disposal of this Court when required……………………….……or  
the value thereof, or such portion of the value as may be sufficient to satisfy any decree that may be  passed 315 
 against him; or to appear and show cause why he should not furnish security;   and you are further ordered 
to attach the said……………..and keep the same under safe and secure custody until the further order of 
the Court; and you are further commanded to return this warrant on or before the………………....day 
of…….  20…….  , with an endorsement certifying the date on which and the manner in which it has been 
executed, or the reason why it has not been executed.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, thi s………………..day of………… 20……….  
Judge.  
No. 6  
SECURITY FOR THE  PRODUCTION OF  PROPERTY   
(O. 38, r. 5.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS  at the instance of………………………., the plaintiff in the above suit, …………………... 
the defendant has been directed by the Co urt to furnish security in th e sum of Rs……………………….to  
produce and place at the disposal of the Court the property specified in the schedule hereunto annexed;  
Therefore I……………………...have voluntarily become surety and do hereby bind myself, my heirs 
and executors, to the said Court, that  the said defendant shall produce and place at the disposal of the  Court,  
when required, the property specified in the said schedule, or the value of the same, or such portion  thereof as  
may be sufficient to satisfy the decree; and in default of his so d oing, I bind myself, my heirs and executors, to  
pay to the said Court , at its order, the said sum of Rs…………………or such sum not exceeding the said  
sum as the said Court may adjudge.  
Schedule  
Witness  my hand at…………………..this…………..day of…………………….. 20………    
(Signed.)  
Witnesses.  
1.  
       2. 
 
No. 7  
ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT, ON PROOF OF FAILURE TO FURNISH  SECURITY  
(O. 38, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS ……………………, the plaintiff in this suit, has applied to the Court to call upon…….. 
the defenda nt, to furnish security to fulfil any decree that may be passed against him in the suit, and  whereas  
the Court has called upon the said………………………….to furnish such security, which he has failed to 
do; these are to command you to attach………….., the property o f the said………., and keep the  
same under safe and secure custody until the further order of the Court, and you are further commanded  to 
return this warrant on or before the…………..day of……………. 20………………………………with an  
endorsement certifying the date on which an d the manner in which it has been executed, or the reason  why it  
has not been executed.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this……………….day of………… 20………  
Judge.  316 
 No. 8   
TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS   
(O. 39, r. 1.)  
  
(Title)  
Upon motion made unto this Cour t by……………Pleader of [or Counsel for] the plaintiff A. B., and 
upon reading the petition of the said plaintiff in this matter filed [this day] [ or the plaint filed in this suit on  the 
………………………day of……………………, or the written statement of the said plaintiff f iled on 
the……………day of………..] and upon hearing the evidence of…………and………………...in support 
thereof [ if after notice and defendant not appearing : add, and also, the evidence of  ……………………as to  
service of notice of this motion upon the defendant C. D. ]: This Co urt doth order that an injunction be awarded 
to restrain the defendant C. D. his servants, agents and workmen, from pulling down, or suffering to be pulled 
down, the house in the plaint in the said suit of the plaintiff mentioned [ or in the written stateme nt, or petition, of 
the plaintiff and evidence at the hearing of this motion mentioned], being No. 9, Oilmongers Street,  Hindupur,  
in a Taluk of…………..  , and from selling the materials where of the said house is composed, until the  
hearing of this suit or until the further order of this Court.  
Dated this………………….day of…………. 20…….    
Judge.  
[Where the injunction is sought to restrain the negotiation of a note or bill, the ordering part of the 
order may run thus: —] 
………………to restrain the defendant…………….. and…………… ………..from parting without of 
the custody of them or any of them or endorsing, assigning or negotiating the promissory note [ or bill of 
exchange] in question dated on or about the…………, etc., mentioned in the plaintiff's plaint [or petition]  
and the evidenc e heard at this motion until the hearing of this suit, or until the further order of this Court.  
[In Copyright cases ]…………… to restrain the defendant C.D., his servants, agents or workmen from 
printing, publishing or vending a book, called……………………..or any pa rt thereof, until the, etc.  
[Where part only of a book is to be restrained ] 
.………….to restrain the defendant C.D., his servants, agents or workmen, from printing, publishing, 
selling or otherwise disposing of such parts of the book in the plaint [ or petitio n and evidence, etc.] mentioned 
to have been published by the defendant as hereinafter specified, namely, that part of the said book  which is 
entitled………..and also that part which is entitled…………………….................[ or which is contained in 
page………..to pa ge both inclusive] until ……………….., etc.  
[In Patent cases ]……………..to restrain the defendant C. D ., his agents, servants and workmen, from 
making or vending any perforated bricks [ or as the case maybe ] upon the principle of the inventions in 
the plaintiff's p laint [ or petition, etc., or written statement, etc.,] mentioned, belonging to the plaintiffs, or  either of 
them, during the remainder of the respective terms of the patents in the plaintiff's plaint [ or as the case  may be ] 
mentioned, and from counterfeiti ng, imitating or resembling the same inventions, or either of them, or  making  
any addition thereto, or subtraction  therefrom, until the hearing, etc.  
[In cases of Trade marks ]……………to restrain the defendant C.D., his servants, agents or workmen, 
from selli ng, or exposing for sale, or procuring to be sold, any composition or blacking [ or as the case may be ] 
described as or purporting to be blacking manufactured by the plaintiff A.B., in bottles having affixed thereto 
such labels as in the plaintiff's plaint [or petition, etc .] mentioned, or any other labels so contrived or expressed 
as, by colourable imitation or otherwise, to represent the composition or blacking sold by the defendant to be 
the same as the composition or blacking manufactured and sold by the  plaintiff A.B., and from using trade -cards  317 
 so contrived or expressed as to represent that any composition or blacking sold or proposed to be sold by the 
defendant is the same as the composition or blacking manufactured or sold by the plaintiff A. B. until the etc.  
[To restrain a partner from in any way interfering in the business ] 
to restrain the defendant C.D., his agents, and servants, from entering into any contract, and from 
accepting, drawing, endorsing or negotiating any bill of exchange, note or w ritten security in the name of the 
partnership -firm of  B. and D., and from contracting any debt, buying and selling any goods, and from making  or  
entering into any verbal or written promise, agreement or undertaking, and from doing, or causing to be done,  
any act, in the name or on the credit of the said partnership -firm of B. and D., or whereby the said partnership -
firm can or may in any manner become or be made liable to or for the payment of any sum of money, or for  the 
performance of any contract, prom ise or undertaking until the, etc.  
No.  1[9] 
APPOINTMENT OF A RECEIVER   
(O . 40,  r. 1.)  
(Title) 
To 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
WHEREAS ……………….has been attached in execution of a decree passed in the above suit on the........... 
day of……………. 20…….., in favour of……….; You are hereby (subject to your giving security  
to the satisfaction of the Court) appointed receiver of the said property under Order XL of the Code of  Civil 
Procedure, 1908, with full powers under the provisions of that Order.  
You are required to render a due and proper account of your receipts and disbursements in respect of  the  
said property on  ............ You will be entitled to remuneration at the rate of…………………per cent. upon  
your receipts under the authority of this appoint ment.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………..day of………. 20 
Judge.  
No. 2[10] 
BOND TO BE GIVEN BY RECEIVER  
(O. 40, r. 3 .)  
(Title) 
KNOW  all men by these presents, that we,……… and……………..and………………., are jointly and 
severally bound to…………..of t he Court of………in Rs……………..  to be paid to the said………or  
his successor in office for the time being. For which payment to be made we bind ourselves, and each of us,  in  
the whole, our and each of our heirs, executors and administrators, jointly and severall y, by these presents.  
Dated this…………..day of…………… 20………..    
WHEREAS  a plaint has been filed in the Court by……….against……………for the purpose of [ here 
insert the object of suit ]: 
                                                      
1. The number of the Form, originally misprinted as 6, was corrected by Act 10 of 1914, s. 2 and the First Sch.  
2. The number of the Form, originally misprinted as 7, was corrected by Act 10 of 1914, s. 2 and the First Sch.  318 
 And whereas the said……………….has been appointed, by order of the above -mentioned Co urt, to 
receive the rents and profits of the immovable property and to get in the outstanding movable property 
of…………….. in the said plaint named:  
Now the condition of this obligation is such, that if the above -bounden………shall duly account for 
all and every  the sum and sums of money which he shall so receive on account of the rents and profits of 
the immovable property, and in respect of the movable property, of the said….......at such periods as the  said  
Court shall appoint, and shall duly pay the balances  which shall from time to time be certified to be due  from him 
as the said Court hath directed or shall hereafter direct, then this obligation shall be void, otherwise it  shall  
remain in full force.  
Signed and delivered by the above -bounden in the presenc e of……………………  
NOTE. —If deposit of money is made, the memorandum thereof should follow the terms of the 
condition of the bond.  319 
  
APPENDIX  G 
APPEAL , REFERENCE AND REVIEW  
No. 1  
MEMORANDUM OF APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 1.)  
(Title) 
The.................................... ........... above -named appeals to the……………………………………... 
Court at…………………from the decree of……………in Suit No……………… of……………..  20…… 
dated the……………….day of……………… 20………,and sets forth the following grounds of objection  
to the decree appealed from, namely: —  
 
No. 2  
SECURITY  BOND TO BE GIVEN ON  ORDER BEING MADE TO STAY  EXECUTION OF  DECREE  
(O. 41, r. 5.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
This security bond on stay of execution of decree executed by………………………...witnesseth: — 
That………..,  the plaintiff in Su it No.…………………of. ...........................20... ……………having sued  
………………..  , the defendant, in this Court and a decree having been passed on the……………….day 
of………………20……, in favour of the plaintiff, and the defendant having preferred an appeal from the 
said d ecree in the………  Court, the said appeal is still pending.  
Now the plaintiff decree -holder having applied to execute the decree, the defendant has made an  application 
praying for stay of execution and has been called upon to furnish security. Accordingly I, of my own  free will, 
stand security to the extent of Rs.  ………………..,mortgaging the properties specified in the schedule  
hereunto annexed, and covenant that if the decree of the first Court be confirmed or varied by the Appellate 
Court 'the said defendant sh all duly act in accordance with the decree of the Appellate Court and shall pay 
whatever may be payable by him thereunder, and if he should fail therein then any amount so payable shall 
be realized from the properties hereby mortgaged, and if the proceeds of the sale of the said properties are 
insufficient to pay the amount due, I and my legal representatives will be personally liable to pay the  balance.  
To this effect I execute this security bond this………..day of……………… 20……….    
Schedule  
(Signed.)  
Witnessed b y 
1. 
2. 320 
 No. 3  
SECURITY  BOND TO BE GIVEN DURING THE PENDENCY OF APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
To 
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
THIS security bond on stay of execution of decree executed by witnesseth: — 
That………………., the plaintiff in Suit No……… ……………of…………………… 20…….  
having sued………………, defendant,, in this Court and a decree having been passed on the  
………………….day of  ………………………. 20……in favour of the plaintiff, and the defendant having 
preferred an appeal from the said decree in the................. Cour t, the said appeal is still pending.  
Now the plaintiff decree -holder has applied for execution of the said decree and has been called upon to 
furnish security. Accordingly I, of my own free will, stand security to the extent of Rs……………... ………,  
mortgaging the properties specified in the schedule hereunto annexed, and covenant that if the decree of the 
first Court be reversed or varied by the Appellate Court, the plaintiff shall restore any property which may  be  
or has been taken in execution of the said de cree and shall duly act in accordance with the decree of the 
Appellate Court and shall pay whatever may be payable by him thereunder, and if he should fail therein  then 
any amount so payable shall be reali sed from the properties hereby mortgaged, and if th e proceeds of the  sale  
of the said properties are insufficient to pay the amount due, I and my legal representatives will be  personally  
liable to pay the balance. To this effect I execute this security bond this……………………day of  
………………. 20…….  
Schedule  
(Signe d.) 
Witnessed by  
1. 
2. 
No. 4  
SECURITY FOR COSTS OF APPEAL  
 (O. 41, r. 10.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    This security bond for costs of appeal executed by……………….witnesseth: — 
    This appellant has preferred an appeal from the decr ee in Suit No. …………………………………of  
………………… 20……, against the respondent, and has been called upon to furnish security. Accordingly  
I, of my own free will, stand security for the costs of the appeal, mortgaging the properties specified in the 
schedule hereunto annexed. I shall not transfer the said properties or any part thereof, and in the event of any 
default on the part of the appellant, I shall duly carry out any order that may be made against me with regard  to  
payment of the costs of appeal. Any amount so payable shall be reali sed from the properties hereby  mortgaged,  
and if the proceeds of the sale of the said properties are insufficient to pay the amount due I and my legal 
representatives will be personally liable to pay the balance. T o this effect, I ex ecute this security bond this 
…………………. day of……………. 20……..    
Schedule  
Witnessed by  
1. 
2.                                                                                                                                   (Signed.)  
  321 
 No. 5  
INTIMATION TO LOWER COURT OF ADMISSION OF APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 13.)  
(Title)  
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
You are hereby directed to take notice that……………………, the………………….........in the above 
suit, has preferred an appeal to this Court from the decree passed by you t herein on the…………............... 
day of………………….. 20………….  
You are requested to send with all practicable despatch all material papers in the suit.  
Dated the………………day of……………….. 20……………….    
Judge.  
No. 6  
NOTICE TO RESPONDENT OF THE DAY FIXED FOR THE HEARING OF THE APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 14.)  
(Title) 
Appeal from the……………of the Court…………………………..of……………………….......  
dated……………………the……………………..day of……………. 20………    
To 
                         Respondent   
Take notice that an appeal from the decree of………………………………in this case h as been presented 
by…………………………………and registered in this Court, and that the…………day of………  
20……….. has been fixed by this Court for the hearing of this appeal.  
If no appearance is made on your behalf by yourself, your pleader, or by some one by law auth orised 
to act for you in this appeal, it will be heard and decided in your absence.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………day of…………………… 20...... 
Judge.  
[NOTE—If a stay of execution has been ordered intimation should be given of the fact on this  notice.]  
 
No. 7  
NOTICE TO A PARTY TO A SUIT NOT MADE , A PARTY TO THE APPEAL BUT JOINED BY THE  COURT AS A 
RESPONDENT  
(O. 41, r. 20.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  322 
 WHEREAS  you were a party in Suit No…………………….of………………… 20………, in the Cour t 
of,………………………., and whereas the…………………has preferred an appeal to this Court from the  
decree passed against him in the said suit and it appears to this Court that you are interested in the result  of the  
said appeal:  
This is to give you notice that this C ourt has directed you to be made a respondent in  the  
said appeal and has adjourned the hearing thereof till the…………………….day of…………….. 20…….,  
at……..  A. M. If no appearance is made on your behalf on the said day and at the said hour the appeal will  be  
heard  and decided in your absence.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………..day of……………. 20……….……….  
Judge .   
No. 8  
MEMORANDUM OF  CROSS  OBJECTION  
(O. 41, r. 22.)  
(Title) 
WHEREAS  the………………has preferred an appeal to the…………………Court……………  
at…………from the decree of…………in Suit No………………………of…………… 20……….  
dated the……………… day of………………………….. 20………………, and whereas notice of the day  
fixed for hearing the appeal was served………………………………..on the………………………….day 
of…………………… 20……….., the  files this memorandum of cross obje ction under rule  
22 of Order XLI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and sets forth the following grounds of objection 
to the decree appealed from, namely: —  
No. 9  
DECREE IN  APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 35.)  
(Title ) 
Appeal No. …………………….of ...........20 …........... ...................from the decree of the Court of  
………………..dated the……………….day of…………………… 20…………..    
 
Memorandum of Appeal.  
Plaintiff.  
versus  
Defendant . 
The………………………..above -named appeals to the…………………….Court at……….........from 
the decree of………………….in the ab ove suit dated the……………………….day of……………  
20…………., for the following reasons, namely: — 
This appeal coming on for hearing on the…..……………..day of……………. 20…………….., before 
in the presence of………….or the appellant and of……………………….for the respondent, it is  
ordered — 
The costs of this appeal, as detailed below, amounting to Rs…………………………..are to be paid 
by………………………The cost of the original suit are to be paid by………………………..  
GIVEN  under my hand this………………………..day of……………………… 20………….    
Judge.  
 323 
  
 
 
Costs of  Appeal  
Appellant  Amount  Respondent  Amount  
1. Stamp for memorandum of appeal…  
2. Do. for power…………    
3. Service of processes……….    
4. Pleader's fee on Rs. …………..
   Rs. A. P. Stamp for power………    
Do. for petition……..    
Service of processes…..    
Pleader ’s fee on Rs. .…..  Rs. A. P. 
TOTAL        TOTAL        
 
 
No. 10  
APPLICATION TO APPEAL IN forma pauperis  
(O. 44, r. 1.)  
(Title)  
I…………………the…………………………………………above -named, present the accompanying 
memorandum of appeal from the decree in the above suit and apply to be allowed to ap peal as a  pauper.  
Annexed is a full and true schedule of all the movable and immovable property belonging to me with 
the estimated value thereof.  
Dated the…………………….day of………………….. 20……………….    
(Signed. ) 
[NOTE .—Where  the application is by the plaintiff he sho uld state whether he applied and was allowed to 
sue in the Court of first instance as a pauper.]  
 
No. 11  
NOTICE OF APPEAL IN  forma pauperis  
(O. 44, r. 1.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS  the above -named…………………………...has applied to be allowed to appeal  as a pauper 
from the decree in the above suit dated the…………………..day of…………........... 20…..………………  
and whereas the……………………day of…………… 20…………………….., has been fixed for hearing  
the application, notice is hereby given to you that if you desire to show cause why the applicant shoul d not be 
allowed to appeal as a pauper an opportunity will be given to you of doing so on the afore -mentioned date.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………….day of……………………….. 20.... 
Judge . 
  324 
 No. 12  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY A CERTIFICATE OF APPEAL TO THE 1[SUPREME COURT] SHOULD NOT BE GRANTED  
(O. 45, r. 3.)  
(Title ) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2[TAKE notice that…………………………………………………………………….has applied to this 
Court for a certificate —  
(i) that the case involves a substantial quest ion of law of general importance, and  
(ii) that in the opinion of this Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.]  
The ……………………………day of………………….. 20……….is fixed for you to show cause why 
the Court should not grant the certificate aske d for.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………….day of………………………… 20.... 
Registrar . 
 
No. 13  
NOTICE TO  RESPONDENT OF ADMISSION OF  APPEAL TO THE 1[SUPREME  COURT ] 
(O. 45, r. 8.)  
(Title)  
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
WHEREAS……………………… ………… ., the………………..in the above case, has furnished the security 
and made the deposit required by Order XLV, rule 7, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:  
Take notice that the appeal of the said………………………to 3[the Supreme Court] has been 
admitted on the……………… …day of………………… 20………    
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this…………….. day of…………………..…… 20… 
Registrar.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “KING IN COUNCIL”.  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1973, s. 4, for the former paragraph.  
3. Subs. by t he A.O . 1950 , for “His Majesty in Council”.  325 
  
No. 14  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY A REVIEW SHOULD NOT BE GRANTED  
(O. 47, r. 4.)  
(Title) 
To 
TAKE notice that…………………………has applied to this Court for a review of its decree passed on 
the………………………day of……………………………. 20…………………… in the above case. The 
……………….day of…………………….. 20…………………fixed for you to show cause why the Court  
should not grant a review of its decree in this case.  
GIVEN  under my hand  and the seal of the Court, this…………….. day of……………………. 20.... 
 
Judge.   326 
 APPENDIX  H 
MISCELLANEOUS  
No. 1 
AGREEMENT OF PARTIES AS TO ISSUES TO BE TRIED  
(O. 14, r. 6.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS  we, the parties in the above suit, are agreed as to the question of fact [ or of law] to  be 
decided between us and the point at issue between us is whether a claim founded on a bond, dated  the day  
of………………………. 20…………………….and filed as Exhibit………………………..in the said  
suit, is or is not beyond the statute of limitation (or state the poin t at issue whatever it may be) : 
We therefore severally bind ourselves that, upon the finding of the Court in the negative [ or affirmative]  
of such issue,…………………….will pay to the said…………..the sum of Rupees………………….  
(or such sum as the Court shall hold to b e due thereon), and I, the said……………… , will accept the  
said sum of Rupees………………..( or such sum as the Court shall hold to be due) in full satisfaction  
of my claim on the bond aforesaid [ or that upon such finding I, the said………………….., will do or 
abstain fro m doing, etc., etc.]  
             Plaintiff.  
               versus       
           Defendant.  
Witnesses :— 
1. 
2. 
 Dated the……………………………….day of…………………… 20……………..   
No. 2  
NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR THE  TRANSFER OF A  SUIT TO ANOTHER COURT FOR TRIAL  
(Section 24.) 
In the Court of the District Judge of………………………..No………………………of .......20 …….
   
To 
WHEREAS  an application, dated the………………….day of………………………. 20…………..., has 
been made to this Court by…………….the………………………….in Suit No…………………………of 
20……………now pending in the Court of t he…………at………………………………………..in which 
…………………is plaintiff and…………………………...is defendant, for the transfer of the suit for trial 
to the Court of the……………….at…………………….: —   
You are hereby informed that the……………..day of…………………… 20…………………has been 
fixed for the hearin g of the application, when you will be heard if you desire to offer any objection to it.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………….day of……………………… 20………
   
Judge . 
1[No. 2A  
LIST OF WITNESSES PROPOSED TO BE CALLED BY PLAINTIFF/DEFENDANT  
(O. XVI , r. 1.) 
Name of the party  
which proposes to  
call the witness  Name and address  
of the witness   
Remarks]  
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 96 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  327 
 No. 3  
NOTICE OF PAYMENT  INTO  COURT  
(O. 24, r.2.)  
(Title)  
TAKE notice that the defendant has paid into Court Rs. …………………….and says that that sum is 
sufficient to satisfy the plaintiff's claim in full.  
X Y, Pleader for the defendant.  
To Z., Pleader for the plaintiff.  
No. 4  
NOTICE T o SHOW CAUSE (GENERAL FORM)  
(Title)  
To 
WHEREAS  the above -named………………………………………...has made application to this Court 
that……………… ……….;    
You are hereby warned to appear in this Court in person or by a pleader duly instructed on the 
…................................ day of………………… 20......, at……..O’clock in the forenoon, to show cause  
against the application, failing wherein, the said application will be heard and determined ex parte.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this………………day of………. 20………….
   
Judge.  
No. 5  
PLAINTIFF  
LIST OF DOCUMENTS PRODUCED BY  
(O. 13,  r. 1.)  
DEFENDANT  
(Title ) 
No. Description of document.  Date, if any which  
the document bears.  Signature of party or pleader.  
1 2 3 4 
    
No. 6   
NOTICE TO PARTIES OF THE DAY FIXED FOR EXAMINATION OF A WITNESS ABOUT TO LEAVE THE JURISDICTION  
(O. 18, r. 16.)  
(Title)  
To 
Plaintiff (or defendant ). 
.......................... ....... 
.................................  
WHEREAS  in the above suit application has been made to the Court by………………………...that the 
examination of…………………, a witness required by the said…………………………..., in the said suit  
may be taken immediately; and it has bee n shown to the Court's satisfaction that the said witness is about  to  
leave the Court's jurisdiction (or any other good and sufficient cause to be stated);  
Take notice that the examination of the said witness………………………will be taken by the Court 
on the…………… ………day of…………………………… 20…………    
Dated the…………day of……………………………………. 20…………..    
Judge.  
 328 
 No. 7  
COMMISSION TO EXAMINE ABSENT WITNESS  
(O. 26, rr. 4, 18.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS  the evidence of………………………………………is required by the……………….  
in the above suit; and whereas……………………… ……………..; you are requested to take the evidence 
on interrogatories [ or viva voce ] of such witness……………………………………………….and you are 
hereby appointed Commissioner for that purpose. The evidence will be taken in the presence o f the parties or  
their agents if in  attendance, w ho will be at liberty to question the witness on the points specified, and you 
are further requested to make return of such evidence as soon as it may be taken.  
Process to compel the attendance of the witness will be issued by any Court havin g jurisdiction on 
your application.  
A sum of Rs……………………., being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.…………………day of………………. 20……...  
Judge.  
No. 8  
LETTER OF REQUEST  
(O. 26, r.5.)  
(Title)  
(Heading: —To the President and Judges of, etc., etc., or as the case may be.)  
WHEREAS  a suit is now pending in the………………………………………………...in which A. B. is 
plaintiff and C.D. is defendant; And in the said suit the plaintiff claims.  
(Abstract of claim.)  
And whereas it has been represneted to the said Court that it is necessary for the purposes of justice and 
for the due determination of the matters in dispute between the parties, that the following persons should be  
examined as witnesses upon oath touching such matters, tha t is to say:  
E. F.,  of 
     G. H.,  of                                                                                                        
           and 
I. J., of 
 
And it appearing that such witnesses are resident within the jurisdiction of your honoura ble Court;  
Now I…………………………………., as the………………………………. of the said Court, have 
the honour to request, and do hereby request, that for the reasons aforesaid and for the assistance of the  said  
Court, you, as the President and Judges of the said……………….or some one or more of you, will  
be pleased to summon the said witness (and such other witnesses as the agents of the said plaintiff and 
defendant shall humbly, request you in writing so to summon) to attend at such time and place as you  shall  
appoint before som e one or more of you or such other person as according to the procedure of your Court  is 
competent to take the examination of witnesses, and that you will cause such witnesses to be examined  upon  
the interrogatories which accompany this letter of request (or viva voce) touching the said matters in 
question in the presence of the agents of the plaintiff and defendant, or such of them as shall, on due  notice  
given, attend such examination.  
And I further have the honour to request that you will be pleased to  cause the answers of the said 
witnesses to be reduced into writing, and all books, letters, papers and documents produced upon such 
examination to be duly marked for identification, and that you will be further pleased to authenticate such 
examination by the seal of your tribunal, or in such other way as is in accordance with your procedure,  and to return 
the same, together with such request in writing, if any, for the examination of other witnesses to  the said  
Court.  
Note. —If the request is directed to a  Foreign Court, the words “through 1[the Ministry of External  Affairs  
of the Government of India] for transmission” should be inserted after the words “other witnesses” in the 
last line of this form.   
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “His Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs”.  329 
 No. 9  
COMMISSION FOR A LOCAL INVESTIGATION, OR TO EXAM INE ACCOUNTS  
(O. 26, rr. 9,11.)  
(Title) 
To 
     
 
WHEREAS it is deemed requisite, for the  purposes of this suit, that a commission for.........................  
should be issued; You are hereby appointed Commissioner for the purpose of....................... .....................  
Process to compel the attendance before you of any witnesses, or for the production of any documents 
whom or which you may desire to examine or inspect, will be issued by any Court having jurisdiction on 
your application.  
A sum of Rs. .....................................  , being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded.  
 
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.............................day  of............................ 20
  
Judge.  
No. 10  
COMMISSION TO MAKE A PARTITION  
(O. 26, r. 13.)  
(Title) 
To 
     
 
WHEREAS  it is deemed requisite for the purposes of this suit that a commission should be issued to 
make the partition or separation of the property specified in, and according to the rights as declared in, the 
decree of  this Court, dated the..............................  day of......................................... 20......................;You are 
hereby  appointed Commissioner for the said purpose and are directed to make such inquiry as may be 
necessary, to divide the sa id property according to the best of your skill and judgment in the shares set out 
in the said decree, and to allot such shares to be several parties. You are hereby authorized to award sums 
to be paid to any party by any other party for the purpose of equ alizing the value of the shares.  
Process to compel the attendance before you of any witness, or for the production of any documents, 
whom or which you may desire to examine or inspect, will be issued by any Court having jurisdiction on 
your application.  
A sum of Rs. ............... , being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of............................  20. 
Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 330 
 1[No.11  
NOTICE TO CERTIFICATED, NATURAL, OR , de facto  GUARDIAN  
(O. XXXII, r. 3.)  
(Title) 
(Certificated/Natural/de facto Guardian ) 
To 
   
WHEREAS  an application has been presented on the part of the plaintiff*/on behalf of the minor 
defendant*/in the above suit for the appointment of a guardian for th e suit for the minor 
defendant ............. , you (insert the name of the guardian appointed or declared by Court, or natural 
guardian, or the person in whose care the minor is) are hereby required to take notice that unless you 
appear before this Court on or before the day appointed for the hearing of the case and stated in the 
appended summons, and express your consent to act as guardian for the suit for the minor, the Court will 
proceed to appoint some other person to act as a guardian for the minor, for the purposes of the said suit.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of.............................  20. 
Judge.  
No. 11A  
NOTICE TO MINOR DEFENDANT  
(Order XXXII, r. 3.)  
(Title) 
To 
           Minor Defendant  
WHEREA S an application has been presented on the part of the plaintiff in the above suit for the 
appointment of.............................. * as guardian for the suit for you, the minor defendant, you are hereby 
required to take notice to appear in this Court i n person on the....................day 
of.......... 20......................at......................O’clock in the forenoon to show c ause against the application, 
failing which the said application will be heard and determined ex parte.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ......................  day of  ...................  20 .....  
Judge. ] 
No. 12  
NOTICE TO OPPOSITE PARTY OF DAY FIXED FOR HEARING EVIDENCE OF PAUPERISM  
(O. 33, r.6.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS .. .......................................................................................... ...................................................  
has applied to this Court for permission to institute a suit against .......................... in forma pauper  is under  
Order XXXIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and whereas the Court sees no rea son to reject 
the application; and whereas the ......... day of........... 20.....................has been fixed for receiving such  
evidence as the applicant may adduce in proof of his pauperism and for hearing any evidence which may 
be adduced in disproof t hereof:  
Notice is hereby given to you under rule 6 of Order XXXIII that in case you may wish to offer any 
evidence to disprove the pauperism of the applicant, you may do so on appearing in this Court on the said  
.................. day of  ................  20 . 
GIVEN  under my hand and the sea l of the Court, this  ......................  day of  .....................  20 . 
Judge.  
                                                      
*Strike off the words which are not applicable.  
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 96, for Form 11 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  331 
  
No. 13  
NOTICE TO SURETY OF HIS LIABILITY UNDER A DECREE  
(Section 145)  
(Title) 
To 
...........................  
...........................  
 
WHEREAS  you..........................................did on.................. ...........................become liable as surety  for the 
performance of any decree which might be passed against the  said.... ......................... defendant in the 
above suit; and whereas a decree was passed on the ........day of....................... ...20...........................against 
the said defendant for the payment of..........................................................and whereas application has 
been made for execution of the said decree against you:  
 
Take notice that you are hereby requ ired on or before the...................  day of............................  20...... 
to show cause why the said decree should not be executed against you, and if no sufficient cause shall be, 
within the time specified, shown to the satisfaction of the Cour t, an order for its execution will be 
forthwith issued in the terms of the said application.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of................  20. 
 
Judge.  
 
 332 
  
 No. 14  
REGISTER OF  CIVIL SUITS (O. 4, R.2.)  
COURT OF THE OF  AT  
REGISTER OF CIVIL SUITS IN THE YEAR 20 
 
Return of Execution  
Minute of other 
Return than 
Payment or 
Arrest, and date 
to every Return   
NOTE.—Where there are numerous plaintiffs, or numerous defendants, the name of the first Plaintiff only,  or the first defendant only, as 
the case may be, need be entered in the register.  
  
  Execution  
  
  
  
  
  Appeal  
  
  Judgment  
  
  
  Appearanc
e 
  
  
   
   
  
  Defendant  
  
  
  Plaintiff  
  
  
  Claim  
   
  333 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No. 15 
REGISTER OF APPEALS  (O. 41, r.9.)  
COURT (OR HIGH COURT) AT  
REGISTER OF APPEALS FROM DECREES IN THE YEAR 20 ………  
 
Judgment  
  
  
  Appearance  
  
  
  Decree appealed  from  
  
  
  
  Respondent  
  
  
  Appellant  
  
  
   
   
  334 
 1[APPENDIX -I  
STATEMENT OF TRUTH   
(Under First Schedule, Order VI - Rule 15A and Order XI - Rule 3)  
I ----- the deponent do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:  
1. I am the party in the above suit and competent to swear this affidavit.  
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also examined all relevant 
documents and records in relation thereto.  
3. I say that the stat ements made in -----paragraphs are true to my knowledge and statements made in -
----paragraphs are based on information received which I believe to be correct and statements made in ---
paragraphs are based on legal advice.  
4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material fact, document or record and I 
have included information that is according to me, relevant for the present suit.  
5. I say that all documents in my power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the facts and 
circumstances of the proceedings initiated by me have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the 
plaint, and that I do not have any other documents in my power, possession, control or custody.  
6. I say that the above -mentioned pleading comprises o f a total of ----- pages, each of which has been 
duly signed by me.  
7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents referred to and relied upon by me.  
8. I say that I am aware that for any false statement or concealment, I shall be liable for action taken 
against me under the law for the time being in force.  
 
Place:  
 
Date:  
 
DEPONENT  
 
VERIFICATION  
I, ………………………. do hereby declare that the statements made above are true to my 
knowledge.  
Verified at [place] on this [date]  
 
DEPONENT .]
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  335 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
     
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs). — 
After Appendix H, insert the following Appendix, namely: — 
APPENDIX -I  
STATEMENT OF TRUTH   
(Under First Schedule, Order VI - Rule 15A and Order XI - Rule 3)  
I ----- the deponent do hereby solemnly a ffirm and declare as under:  
1. I am the party in the above suit and competent to swear this affidavit.  
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also examined all relevant 
documents and records in relation thereto.  
3. I say tha t the statements made in -----paragraphs are true to my knowledge and statements made            
in -----paragraphs are based on information received which I believe to be correct and statements made              
in ---paragraphs are based on legal advice.  
4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material fact, document or record and I 
have included information that is according to me, relevant for the present suit.  
5. I say that all documents in my power, possession, control or custo dy, pertaining to the facts and 
circumstances of the proceedings initiated by me have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the 
plaint, and that I do not have any other documents in my power, possession, control or custody.  
6. I say that the abov e-mentioned pleading comprises of a total of ----- pages, each of which has been 
duly signed by me.  
7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents referred to and relied upon by me.  
8. I say that I am aware that for any false state ment or concealment, I shall be liable for action taken 
against me under the law for the time being in force.  
 
Place:  
 
Date:  
 
DEPONENT  
 
VERIFICATION  
I, ………………………. do hereby declare that the statements made above are true to my 
knowledge.  
Verified at [ place] on this [date]  
 
DEPONENT.]  
 
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  336 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE. —[Arbitration .] Rep. by the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940),             
s. 49 ( 1) and the Third Sch . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. —[Execution of Decrees by Collectors .] Rep by the Code  of Civil 
Procedure (Amendment) Act , 1956 (66 of 1956), s. 15. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. —[Enactments amended. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 
1952 (48 of 1952), s. 2 and the First Sch.  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. —[Enactments repealed .] Rep. by the Second Repea ling and Amending 
Act, 1914 (17 of 1914). s. 3 and the Second Sch.  337 
 ANNEXURE   
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1976  
(104 OF 1976)  
*       *    *   *   * 
CHAPTER  V 
REPEAL AND SAVINGS  
97. Repeal and savings. —(1) Any amendment made, or any provisi on inserted in the principal Act by 
State Legislature or a High Court before the commencement of this Act shall except in so far as such 
amendment or provision is consistent with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, stand 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding that the provisions of this Act have come into force or the repeal under             
sub-section ( 1) has taken effect, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sect ion 6 of 
the General Clauses Act , 1897 (10 of 1897), — 
(a) the amendment made to clause (2) of section 2 of the principal Act by section 3 of this Act 
shall not affect any appeal against the determination of any such question as is referred to in                
section 47 and every such appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 3 had not come into force;  
(b) the provisions of section 20 of the principal Act, as amended by section 7 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any suit pending immediately before the commencement of the said section; and 
every such suit shall be tried as if the said section 7 had not come into force;  
(c) the provisions of section 21 of the principal Act, as amended by section 8 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any suit pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 8; and 
every such suit shall be tried as if the said section 8 had not come into force;  
(d) the provisions of section 25 of the principal Act , as substituted by section 11 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any suit, appeal or other  proceeding wherein any report has been made under 
the provisions of section 25 before the commencement of the said section 11; and every such suit, 
appeal or other proceeding shall be dealt with as if the said section11 had not come into force;  
(e) the pr ovisions of section 34 of the principal Act, as amended by section 13 of this Act, shall not 
affect the rate at which interest may be allowed on a decree in any suit instituted before the 
commencement of the said section 13 and interest on a decree passed in such suit shall be ordered in 
accordance with the provisions of section 34 as they stood before the commencement of the said                 
section 13 as if the said section 13 had not come into force;  
(f)  the provisions of section 35A of the principal  Act, as amended by section 14 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any proceedings for revision, pending immediately before the commencement of 
the said section 14 and every such proceedings shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 
14 had not come into force;  
(g) the provisions of section 60 of the principal Act, as amended by section 23 of this Act, shall 
not apply to any attachment made before the commencement of the said section 23;  
(h) the amendment of section 80 of the principal  Act by section 27 of this Act shall not apply to 
or affect any suit instituted before the commencement of the said section 27; and every such suit shall 
be dealt with as if section 80 had not been amended by the said section 27;  
(i) the provisions of sect ion 82 of the principal Act, as amended by section 28 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any decree passed against the Union of India or a State or, as the case may  be, a public 
officer, before the commencement of the said section 28 or to the execu tion of any such decree; and 
every such decree or execution shall be dealt with as if the said section 28 had not come into force;  
(j) the provisions of section 91 of the principal Act, as amended by section 30 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any  suit, appeal or proceeding instituted or filed before the commencement of 
the said section 30; and every such suit, appeal or proceeding shall be disposed of as if the said 
section 30 had not come into force;  338 
 (k) the provisions of section 92 of the princi pal Act, as amended by section 31 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any suit, appeal or proceeding instituted or filed before the commencement of 
the said section 31; and every such suit, appeal or proceeding shall be disposed of as if the said 
section 31 had not come into force;  
(1) the provisions of section 96 of the principal Act, as amended by section 33 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any appeal against the decree passed in any suit instituted before the commencement 
of the said secti on 33; and every such appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 33 had not come 
into force;  
(m) the provisions of section 100 of the principal Act, as substituted by section 37 of this Act,  
shall not apply to or affect any appeal from an appellate  decree or order which had been admitted; 
before the commencement of the said section 37 , after hearing under rule 11 of Order XLI; and every 
such admitted appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 37 had not come into force;  
(n) section 100A, as i nserted in the principal Act, by section 38 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any appeal against the decision of a single Judge of a High Court under any Letter s Patent 
which had been admitted before the commencement of the said section 38; and eve ry such admitted 
appeal shall be disposed of as if the said section 38 had not come into force;  
(o) the amendment of section 115 of the principal Act, by section 43 of this Act, shall not apply 
to or affect any proceeding for revision which had been admitt ed, after preliminary hearing, before 
the commencement of the said section 43; and every such proceeding for revision shall be disposed 
of as if the said section 43 had not come into force;  
(p) the provisions of section 141 of the principal Act, as amended  by section 47 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any proceeding which is pending immediately before the commencement of the 
said section 47; and every such proceeding shall be dealt with as if the said section 47 had not come 
into force;  
(q) the pr ovisions of rule s 31, 32, 48A, 57 to 59, 90 and 97 to 103 of Order XXI of the First 
Schedule as amended or, as the case may be, substituted or inserted by section  72 of this Act shall 
not apply to or affect — 
(i) any attachment subsisting immediately before  the commencement of the said section 72, 
or 
(ii) any suit instituted before such commencement under rule 63 aforesaid to establish right 
to attached property or under rule 103 aforesaid to establish possession, or  
(iii) any proceeding to set aside the sal e of any immovable property,  
and every such attachment, suit or proceeding shall be continued as if the said section 72 had not come 
into force;  
(r) the provisions of rule 4 of Order XXII of the First Schedule, as substituted by section 73 of this 
Act shal l not apply to any order of abatement made before the commencement of the said section 73;  
(s) the amendment, as well as substitution made in Order XXIII of the First Schedule by              
section 74 of this Act shall not apply to any suit or proceeding  pending before the commencement of 
the said section 74;  
(t) the provisions of rules 5A and 5B of Order XXVII, as inserted by section 76 of this Act, shall 
not apply to any suit, pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 76; against 
the Government or any public officer; and every such suit shall be dealt with as if the said section 76 
had not come into force;  
(u) the provisions of rules 1A, 2A and 3 of Order XXVIIA, as inserted or substituted, as the case 
may be, by section 77 of this Act shall not apply to or affect any suit which is pending before the 
commencement of the said section 77;  
 339 
 (v) rules 2A, 3A and 15 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule, as amended, or as the case may be , substituted 
by section 79 of this Act, shall not ap ply to a suit pending at the commencement of the said section 79 and every 
such suit shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 79 had not come into force;  
(w) the provisions of Order XXXIII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 81 o f this Act, shall not apply 
to or affect any suit or proceeding pending before the commencement of the said section 81 for permission to sue as 
a pauper; and every such suit or proceeding shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 81 had no t come 
into force;  
(x) the provisions of Order XXXVII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 84 of this Act, shall not 
apply to any suit pending before the commencement of the said section 84 , and every such suit shall be dealt with 
and disposed of a s if the said section 84 had not come into force;  
(y) the provisions of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule, as amended by section 86 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any injunction subsisting immediately before the commencement of the said section 86; and 
every such injunction and proceeding for dis -obedience of such injunction shall be dealt with as if the said                
section 81 had not come into force;  
(z) the provisions  of Order XLI of the First Schedule, as amended by section 87 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any appeal pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 87 ; and every such appeal 
shall be disposed of as if the said section 87 had not come into force:  
(za) the provisions of Order XLII of the First Sc hedule, as amended by section 88 of this Act , shall not apply 
to or affect any appeal from an appellate decree or order which had been admitted, before the commencement of 
the said section 88 after hearing under rule 11 of Order XLI; and every such admitte d appeal shall be dealt with as 
if the said section 88 had not come into force;  
(zb) the provisions of Order XLIII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 89 of this Act , shall not apply to 
any appeal against any order pending immediately before the c ommencement of the said section 89; and every such 
appeal shall be disposed of as if the said section 89 had not come into force;  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), the provision s of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, 
shall apply to  every suit, proceedings, appeal or application, pending at the commencement of this Act or instituted or 
filed after such commencement, notwithstanding the fact that the right, or cause of action, in pursuance of which such 
suit, proceeding, appeal or app lication is instituted or filed, had been acquired or had accrued before such 
commencement.  
*    *    *    * 
 
1 
 THE FOREIGN  MARRIEGE  ACT, 1969  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTONS  
 
CHAPTER   I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Marriage Officers.  
CHAPER   II  
SOLEMNIZATION OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES  
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of foreign marriages.  
5. Notice of intended marriage.  
6. Marriage Notice Book.  
7. Publication of notice  
8. Objection to marriage.  
9. Solemnization of marriage where no objection made.  
10. Procedure on receipt of objection . 
11. Marriage not to be in contravention of local laws.  
12. Declaration by parties and witnesses.  
13. Place and form of solemnization.  
14. Certificate of marriage . 
15. Validity of foreign marriages in India . 
16. New notice when marriage not solemnized within six months . 
CHAPTER   III  
REGISTRATION OF FOREIGN MAR RIAGES SOLEMNIZED UNDER OTHER LAWS  
17. Registration of foreign marriages . 
CHAPTER    IV  
MATRIMONIAL RELIEF IN RESPECT OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES  
18. Matrimonial reliefs to be under Special Marriage Act, 1954.  
CHAPTER   V  
PENALTIES  
19. Punishment for bigamy . 
20. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for marriage . 
21. Punishment for false declaration . 2 
 SECTION S 
22. Punishment for wrongful action of Marriage Officer.  
CHAPTER   VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Recognition of marriages solemnized under law of other countries.  
24. Certification of documents of marriages solemnized in accordance with local law in a           
foreign country.  
25. Certified copy of entries to be evidences . 
26. Correction of errors . 
27. Act not to affect validity of marriages outside it . 
28. Power to make rules . 
29. Amendment of Act 43 of 1954 . 
30. Repeal.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE .— FORM OF NOTICE OF INTENDED MARRIAGE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . —DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM  AND THE              
                                                    BRIDE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE .— FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE FOREIGN MARRIAGE ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1969  
[31st August,  1969.]  
An Act to make provision relating to marriages of citizens of India outside India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows : — 
CHAPTER   I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 . 
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “degrees of prohibited relationship ” shall have the same meaning as in the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954);  
(b) “district ”, in relation to a Marriage Officer, means the area withi n which the duties of his 
office are to be discharged;  
(c) “foreign country ” means a country or place outside India, and includes a ship which is for the 
time being in the territorial waters of such a country or place;  
(d) “Marriage Officer ” means a person  appointed under section 3 to be a Marriage Officer;  
(e) “official house ”, in relation to a Marriage Officer, means — 
(i) the official house of residence of the officer;  
(ii) the office in which the business of the officer is transacted;  
(iii) a prescribed place; and  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Marriage Officers. —For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint such of its diplomatic or consular officers as it may think fit to be Marriage 
Officers for any foreign country.  
Explanation .—In this section, “diplomatic officer ” means an ambassador, envoy, minister, high 
commissioner, commissioner, charge  d’ affairs  or other diplomatic representative or a counsellor or 
secretary of an embassy, legation or high commission.  
CHAPER   II  
SOLEMNIZATION OF FOREIGN MA RRIAGES  
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of foreign marriages. —A marriage between parties one of 
whom at least is a citizen of India may be solemnized under this Act by or before a Marriage Officer in a 
foreign country, if, at the time of the marriage, the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: — 
(a) neither party has a spouse living,  
(b) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic,  
(c) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty -one years and the bride the age of eighteen 
years at the time o f the marriage, and  
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:  4 
 Provided that where the personal law or a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a 
marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they are within the 
degree s of prohibited relationship.  
5. Notice of intended marriage. —When a marriage is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the 
parties to the marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified  in the First Schedule to 
the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the marriage has resided for a 
period of not less than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given, and the 
notice shall sta te that the party has so resided.   
6. Marriage Notice Book. —The Marriage Officer shall keep all notices given under section 5 with 
the records of his office and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of every such notice in a book 
prescribed for that purpo se, to be called the “Marriage Notice Book ”, and such book shall be open , for 
inspection at all reasonable times, without fee, by any person desirous of inspecting the same.   
7. Publication of notice .—Where a notice under section 5 is given to the Marriage  Officer, he shall 
cause it to be published — 
(a) in his own office, by affixing a copy thereof to a conspicuous place, and  
(b) in India and in the country or countries in which the parties are ordinarily resident, in the 
prescribed manner.  
8. Objection to marriage. —(1) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the date of 
publication of the notice under section 7, object to the marriage on the ground that it would contravene 
one or more of the conditions specified in section 4.  
Explanation .—Where the publication of the notice by affixation under clause ( a) of section 7 and in 
the prescribed manner under clause ( b) of that section is on different dates, the period of thirty days shall, 
for the purposes of this sub -section, be computed from the  later date.  
(2) Every such objection shall be in writing signed by the person making it or by any person duly 
authorised to sign on his behalf, and shal l state the ground of objection ; and the Marriage Officer shall 
record the nature of the objection in h is Marriage Notice Book.  
9. Solemnization of marriage where no objection made. —If no objection is made within the period 
specified in section 8 to an intended marriage, then, on the expiry of that period, the marriage may be 
solemnized.  
10. Procedure on receipt of objection .—(1) If an objection is made under section 8 to an intended 
marriage, the Marriage Officer shall not solemnize the marriage until he has inquired into the matter of 
the objection in such manner as he thinks fit and is satisfied that it  ought not to prevent the solemnization 
of the Marriage or the objection is withdrawn by the person making it.  
(2) Where a Marriage Officer after making any such inquiry entertains a doubt in respect of any 
objection, he shall transmit the record with such  statement respecting the matter as he thinks fit to the 
Central Government; and the Central Government, after making such further inquiry into the matter and 
after obtaining such advice as it thinks fit, shall give its decision thereon in writing to the M arriage 
Officer, who shall act in conformity with the decision of the Central Government.  
11. Marriage not to be in contravention of local laws. —(1) The Marriage Officer may, for reason s 
to be recorded in writing , refuse to solemnize a marriage under this Act if the intended marriage is 
prohibited by any law in force in the foreign country where it is to be solemnized.  
(2) The Marriage Officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to solemnize a marriage 
under this Act on the ground that in his  opinion, the solemnization of the marriage would be inconsistent 
with international law or the comity of nations.  5 
 (3) Where a Marriage Officer refuses to solemnize a marriage under this section, any party to the 
intended marriage may appeal to the Central  Government in the prescribed manner within a period of 
thirty days from the date of such refusal; and the Marriage Officer shall act in conformity with the 
decision of the Central Government on such appeal.  
12. Declaration by parties and witnesses. —Before  the marriage is solemnized, the parties and three 
witnesses shall, in  the presence of the Marriage Officer, sign a declaration in the form specified in the 
Second Schedule, and the declaration shall be countersigned by the Marriage Officer.  
13. Place and form of solemnization. —(1) A marriage by or before a Marriage Officer under this 
Act shall be solemnized at the official house of the Marriage Officer with open doors between the 
prescribed hours in the presence of at least three witnesses.  
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt:  
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties unless each party declares to the 
other in the presence of the Marriage Officer and the three witnesses and in a ny language understood by 
the parties, — “I, (A) take the ( B), to be my lawful wife (or husband) ”: 
Provided further that where the declaration referred to in the preceding proviso is made in any 
language which is not understood by the Marriage Officer or by  any of the witnesses, either of the parties 
shall interpret or cause to be interpreted the declaration in a language which the Marriage Officer, or, as 
the case may be, such witness understand s. 
14. Certificate of marriage .—(1) Whenever a marriage is solemnized under this Act, the Marriage 
Officer shall enter a certificate thereof in the form specified in the Third Schedule in a book to be kept by 
him for that purpose and to be called the Marriage Certificate Book, and such certificate shall be signed 
by the parties to the marriage and the three witnesses.  
(2) On a certificate being entered in the Marriage Certificate Book by the Marriage Officer, the 
certificate shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act has be en 
solemnized, and that all formalities respecting the residence of the party concerned previous to the 
marriage and the signatures of witnesses have been complied with.  
15. Validity of foreign marriages in India .—Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a 
marriage solemnized in the manner provided in this Act shall be good and valid in law.  
16. New notice when marriage not solemnized within six months .—Whenever a marriage is not 
solemnized within six months from the date on which no tice thereof has been given to the Marriage 
Officer as required under section 5 or where the record of a case has been transmitted to the Central 
Government under section 10, or where an appeal has been preferred to the Central Government under 
section 11,  within three months from the date of decision of the Central Government in such case or 
appeal, as the case may be, the notice and all other proceedings arising therefrom shall be deemed to have 
lapsed, and no Marriage Officer shall solemnize the marriage  until new notice has been given in the 
manner laid down in this Act.  
CHAPTER   III  
REGISTRATION OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED UNDER OTHER LAWS  
17. Registration of foreign marriages .—(1) Where — 
(a) a Marriage Officer is satisfied that a marriage has been duly solemnized in a foreign country 
in accordance with the law of  that country between parties of whom one at least was a citizen of 
India; and  
(b) a party to the marriage informs the Marriage Office r in writing that he or she desires the 
marriage to be registered under this  section,  6 
 the Marriage Officer may, upon payment of the prescribed fee, register the marriage.  
(2) No marriage shall be registered under th e section unless at the time of registra tion it satisfies the 
conditions mentioned in section 4.  
(3) The Marriage Officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to register a marriage 
under this section on the ground that in his opinion the marriage is inconsistent with international  law or 
the comity of nations.  
(4) Where a Marriage Officer refuses to register a marriage under this section the party applying for 
registration may appeal to the Central Government in the prescribed manner within a period of thirty days 
from the date of such refusal; and the Marriage Officer shall act in conformity with the decision of the 
Central Government on such appeal.  
(5) Registration of a marriage under this section shall be effected by the Marriage Officer by entering 
a certificate of the marriage  in the prescribed form and in the prescribed manner in the Marriage 
Certificate Book, and such certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage and by three 
witnesses.  
(6) A marriage registered under this section shall, as from the date of regis tration, be deemed to have 
been solemnized under this Act.  
CHAPTER    IV  
MATRIMONIAL RELIEF IN RESPECT OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES  
18. Matrimonial reliefs to be under Special Marriage Act, 1954. —(1) Subject to the other 
provisions contained in this section, the provisions of Chapters IV, V,  VI and VII of the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) shall apply in relation to marriages solemnized under this Act and to any other 
marriage solemnized in a foreign country between parties of whom one at least is a citiz en of India as 
they apply in relation to marriages solemni zed under that Act.  
Explanation. —In its application to the marriages referred to in this sub -section, section 24 of the 
Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) , shall be subject to the following mod ifications, namely: — 
(i) the reference in sub -section ( 1) thereof to clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 4 of that Act 
shall be construed as a reference to clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) respectively of section 4 of this        
Act, and  
(ii) nothing  contained in section 24 aforesaid shall apply to any marriage — 
(a) which is not solemnized under this Act; or  
(b) which is deemed to be solemnized under this Act by reason of the provisions contained in 
section 17:  
Provided that the registration of any su ch marriage as is referred to in sub -clause ( b) may be declared 
to be of no effect if the registration was in contravention of sub -section ( 2) of section 17.  
(2) Every petition for relief under Chapter V or Chapter VI of the Special Marriage                         
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) as made applicable to the marriages referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
presented to the district court within the local limits of whose ordinary civil jurisdiction — 
(a) the respondent is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition; or  
(b) the husband and wife last resided together; or  
(c) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, provided that the 
respondent is at that time resi ding outside India.  7 
 Explanation. —In this section, “district court ” has the same meaning as in the Special Marriage        
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) . 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall authorise any court — 
(a) to make any decree of dissolution of marriage, except where — 
(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of the 
petition; or  
(ii) the petitioner, being the wife, was domiciled in India immediately before the marriag e 
and has been residing in  India for a period of not less than three years immediately preceding the 
presentation of the petition;  
(b) to make any decree annulling avoidable  marriage, except where — 
(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of the 
petition; or  
(ii) the marriage was solemnized under this Act and the petitioner being the wife, has been 
ordinarily resident in India for a period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of 
the petition;  
(c) to make any decree of nullity of marriage in respect of  a void marriage, except where — 
(i) either of the parties to the marriage is domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of 
the petition; or  
(ii) the marriage was solemnized under this Act and the petitioner is residing in India at the 
time of the presentation of  the petition ; 
(d) to grant any other relief under Chapter V or Chapter VI of the Special Marriage                   
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) , except where the petitioner is residing in India at the time of the presentation 
of the petition.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall authorise any court to grant any relief under this Act in 
relation to any marriage in a foreign country not  solemnized under it, if the grant of relief in respect of 
such marriage  (whether on any of the grounds s pecified in the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43  of 1954) , 
or otherwise ) is provided for under any other law for the time being in  force.  
CHAPTER   V  
PENALTIES  
19. Punishment for bigamy .—(1) Any person whose marriage is solemnized or deemed to have 
been solemnized under this Act and who, during the subsistence of his marriage, contracts any other 
marriage in India shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 494 and secti on 495 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the marriage so contracted shall be void.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) apply also to any such offence committed by any citizen of India 
without and beyond India.  
20. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for marriage .—Any citizen of India 
who procures a m arriage of himself or herself be solemnized under this Act in contravention of the 
condition specified in clause ( c) or clause ( d) of section 4 shall be punishable — 
(a) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause ( c) of section 4, with simple 
imprisonment which may extend to fifteen days,  or with the fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both; and  8 
 (b) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause ( d) of section 4, with simple 
imprisonment which may extend to one month,  or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
21. Punishment for false declaration. —If any citizen of India for the purpose of procuring a 
marriage, intentionally — 
(a) where  a declaration is required by this Act, makes a false declaration; or  
(b) where a notice or certificate is required by this Act, signs a false notice or certificate,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and sh all also be 
liable to fine.  
22. Punishment for wrongful action of Marriage Officer .—Any Marriage Officer who knowingly 
and wilfully solemnizes a marriage under this Act in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act 
shall be punishable with simple i mprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
CHAPTER   VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Recognition of marriages solemnized under law of other countries. —If the Central 
Government is satisfied that the law in force in any foreign country for the solemnization of marriages 
contains provisions similar to those contained in this Act,  it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare that marriages solemnized under the law in force in such foreign cou ntry shall be recognized by 
courts in India as valid.  
24. Certification of documents of marriages solemnized in accordance with local law in a 
foreign country. —(1) Where — 
(a) a marriage is solemnized in any foreign country specified in this behalf by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in accordance with the law of that country 
between parties of whom one at least is a citizen of India; and  
(b) a party to the marriage who is such citizen produces to a Marriage Officer in the co untry in 
which the marriage was  solemnized — 
(i) a copy of the entry in respect of the marriage in the marriage register of that country 
certified by the appropriate authority in that country to be a true copy of that entry; and  
(ii) if the copy of that entry is not in the English language, a translation into the prescribed 
language of that copy; and  
(c) the Marriage Officer is satisfied that the copy of the entry in the marriage register is a true 
copy and that the translation, if any, is a true translation ; 
the Marriage Officer, upon the payment of the prescribed fee, shall certify upon the copy that he is 
satisfied that the copy is a true copy of the entry in the marriage register and upon the translation that he is 
satisfied that the translation is a true translation of the copy and shall issue the copy and the translation to 
the said party.  
(2) A document relating to a marriage in a foreign country issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
admitted in evidence in any proceedings as if it  were a certificate duly issued by the appropriate authority 
of that country.  
25. Certified copy of entries to be evidence .—Every  certified copy purporting to be signed by the 
Marriage Officer of an entry of a marriage in the Marriage Certificate Book shall be received in evidence 
without production or proof of the original.  9 
 26. Correction of errors .—(1) Any Marriage Officer who discovers any error in the form or 
substance of any entry in the Marriage Certificate Book may, within one month next after the discovery of 
such error, in the presence of the persons married , or, in case of their death or absence, in the presence of 
two o ther witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin without any alteration of the original entry 
and add thereto the date of such correction.  
(2) Every correction made under this section shall be attested by the witnesses in whose presence it 
was made . 
27. Act not to affect validity of marriages outside it .—Nothing in this Act shall in any way affect 
the validity of a marriage solemnized in a foreign country otherwise than under this Act.  
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by noti fication in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the duti es and powers of Marriage Officers and their districts;  
(b) the manner in which a Marriage Officer may hold any inquiry under this Act;  
(c) the manner in which notices of marriage shall be published ; 
(d) the  places in which and the hours between which marriages under this Act may be 
solemnized;  
(e) the form and the manner in which any books required by or under this Act to be kept shall be 
maintained;  
(f) the form and manner in which certificates of marriages  may be entered under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 17;  
(g) the fees that may be levied for the performance of any duty imposed upon a Marriage Officer 
under this Act;  
(h) the authorities to which, the form in which and the intervals within which copies of en tries in 
the Marriage Certificate Book shall be sent, and, when corrections are made in the Marriage 
Certificate Book, the manner in which Certificates of such corrections shall be sent to the authorities;  
(i) the inspection of any books required to be kep t under this Act and the furnishing of certified 
copies of entries therein;  
(j) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which any marriage may be recognised 
under section 23;  
(k) any other matter which may be, or requires to be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  1[in two or more successive sessions, and i f, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid ] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effec t only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and  the schedule ., for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  10 
  29. Amendment of Act 43 of 1954 .—In the Speci al Marriage Act, 1954, — 
(a) in section 1, in sub -section ( 2), for the words “outside the said territories ”, the words “in the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir *” shall be substituted;  
(b) in section 2, clauses ( a) and ( c) shall be omitted;  
(c) in section 3, for sub -section ( 2), the following su b-section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(2) For the purposes of this Act, in its application to citizens of India domiciled in the 
territories to which this Act extends who are in the State of Jammu and Ka shmir *, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such officers of the Central 
Government as it may think fit to be the Marriage Officers for the State or any part thereof. ”; 
(d) in section 4, for clause ( e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir *, both parties are 
citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends. ”; 
(e) in section 10, for the words “outside  the territories to which this Act extends in respect of an 
intended marriage outside and said territories ”, the words “in the State of Jammu and Kashmir * in 
respect of an intended marriage in the State ” shall be substituted;  
(f) in section 50, in sub -section ( 1), the words “Diplomatic and consular officers and other ” shall 
be omitted.  
30. Repeal. —The Indian Foreign Marriage Act, 1903 (14 of 1903) , is hereby repealed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*. Vide notification No . S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.11 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
FORM OF NOTICE OF INTENDED MARRIAGE  
To 
The Marriage Officer,  
for ...……………….  
We hereby give you notice that a marriage under the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 is intended to be 
solemnized between us within three months from the date hereof . 
Name and father ’s 
name  Condition  Occupation  Date of birth  Dwelling 
place  Permanent 
dwelling place  
and present  
dwelling place 
if not 
permanent  Length of 
residence in 
the present 
dwelling 
place  
A.B. Unmarried  
         Widower  
         Divorcee  
       
C.D. Unmarried  
         Widow  
         Divorcee        
 
Witness our hands, this ……………… d ay of ………………….. 19.... ..................................  
Sd. A.B.  
Sd. C.D.12 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 12)  
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM  
I, A.B. , hereby declare as follows: — 
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower or a divorcee, as the case may be).  
2. I have completed ……………………… years of age.  
3. I am not related to C.D. (the bride) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
4. I am a citizen of ....…… ……………………  
(to be filled up)  
5. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, I am liable to imprisonment and       
also to fine.  
Sd. A.B. (the bridegroom) . 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE  
I, C.D. , hereby declare as follows: — 
1. I am at  the present time unmarried (or a widow er, or a divorcee, as the case may be).  
2. I have completed ....... years of age.  
3. I am not related to A.B. (the bridegroom) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
4. I am a citizen of....................... ........................  
(to be filled up)  
5. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, I am liable to imprisonment and        
also to fine.  
Sd. C.D. (the bride) . 
Signed in our presence by the above named A.B. and C.D. So far as we are  aware, there is no lawful 
impediment to the marriage.  
Sd. G.H.  
Sd. I.J.                                 
Sd. K.L.                                     Three witnesses.  
                                                     (Countersigned) E.F.  
                                              Marriage Officer  
Dated the ……………………....... day of …………………………..... 19… ………………..  
  
 
 
 
 13 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 14)  
FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE  
I, E.F., hereby certify that on the ……………………… day of …………… 19................... A.B. and 
C.D …………………. *appeared before me and that the declaration r equired by 
section……………………………  of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, was du ly made, and that a marriage 
under that Act was solemnized between them in my presence and in th e presence of three witnesses who 
have signed hereunder.  
Sd. E.F.  
             Marriage Officer,    
Sd. A.B. (bridegroom)    
Sd. CD. (bride)   
Sd. G.H.  
Sd. I.J.                   Three witnesses.  
Sd. K.L.  
Dated the ….…...... ...............  day of … ……….. …. 19............................  
________________________________________________________________________________  
*Herein give particulars of the parties.  
   To be entered. 
 
 
 
Company
: 
Sol Infotech Pvt. Ltd.
Website
: 
www.courtkutchehry.com
INDIAN AND COLONIAL DIVORCE JURISDICTION ACT, 
1940
3 of 1940
[10th July, 1940]
CONTENTS
1. 
Removal 
of doubts as to effect of Matrimonial Causes Act, 1937,
on divorce 
jurisdiction under Indian and Colonial Divorce
Jurisdiction Act, 1926
2. 
Amendment of certain conditions 
precedent to the granting of
relief
3. 
Jurisdiction 
under the principal Act in case of husbands change of
domicile
4. 
Registration 
in England and Scotland of decrees and Orders
under principal Act
5. 
Application to Burma and Colonies
6. 
Areas for which the various High 
Courts in India arc to act
7. 
Meaning 
of "appointed day"
8. 
Short 
title and citation
INDIAN AND COLONIAL DIVORCE JURISDICTION ACT, 
1940
3 of 1940
[10th July, 1940]
An Act to explain and amend Colonial Divorce 
Jurisdiction Act,
1926. Be it enacted by the King's Most Excellent 
Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and 
Temporal,
and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled and by the
authority of the same as follows:- This Act has been amended by
the 
Colonial and Other Territories (Divorce Jurisdiction) Act, 1950
(c. 20) 
and Burma Independence Act, 1947.
1.
 
Removal of doubts as to effect of Matrimonial Causes Act,
1937, on 
divorce jurisdiction under Indian and Colonial
Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 
1926
 :-
(1) For the removal of doubts it is hereby 
declared that in
considering for the purposes of Indian and Colonial 
Divorce
Jurisdiction Act, 1926 (hereinafter in this Act referred to as 
"the
Principal Act")-(a) what are the grounds on which a decree for 
the dissolution of
any marriage may be granted by the High Court in 
England
according to the law for the time being in force in England, and
(b) what are the principles and rules on which 
in the exercise of its
jurisdiction to make decrees for the dissolution 
of a marriage and as
incidental thereto, to make orders as to damages
1
, 
alimony or
maintenance, custody of children and costs, the High Court in
England for the time being acts and gives relief,
section 1 section 2 section 3 section 4 , 
section 6 and section 8 to
ten of Matrimonial Causes Act, 1937 , have to 
be taken into
account and that references in the Principal Act to a decree 
for the
dissolution of a marriage include references to such a decree of
presumption of death and of dissolution of a marriage as is
authorised by 
the said section 8 .
(2) A decree for the dissolution of a marriage 
granted under the
principal Act before the appointed day shall not be 
invalid by
reason only that regard has not been had to the provisions of 
S.1
of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1937
2
 
and where before the
appointed day a petition under the principal Act 
has been dismissed
which would not have been dismissed if the principal 
Act had been
construed in the manner specified in sub-section (1) of 
this section,
the dismissal of the petition shall not prejudice the 
bringing of a
new petition upon the same or substantially the same 
facts.
1. (1937) 1 Edw. VIII and 1 Geo. VI, C. 57.
2. i.e. 1st January, 1941; See section 7 of 
this Act.
2.
 
Amendment of certain conditions precedent to the
granting of relief
 
:-
(1) [Sub- section (1) substituted section 
1(1), proviso (c) of the
principal Act, see that Act, ante.]
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby 
declared that the
provision in the said proviso (c) as originally 
enacted that no Court
shall make any decree of dissolution of marriage 
except where
either the marriage was solemnised in India or the adultery 
or
crime was committed in India did not operate so as to prevent the
making of such a decree on grounds other than adultery or crime
where 
the marriage was solemnised in India; and where before the
appointed day
1
 
a petition for the dissolution of marriage has been
dismissed on the 
ground that the said provision did so operate the
dismissal of the 
petition shall not prejudice the bringing of a newpetition upon the 
same, or substantially the same facts.
1. i.e. 1st January, 1941; see section 7 of 
this Act.
3.
 
Jurisdiction under the principal Act in case of husbands
change of 
domicile
 :-
Where a wife has been deserted by her husband, and 
the husband
was immediately before the desertion domiciled in England or
Scotland but has changed his domicile since the desertion, a High
Court 
in India shall, as from the appointed day, have the same
jurisdiction 
under the principal Act as it would have if the change
had not taken 
place; but, in any such case, a power conferred on
the Court by proviso 
(d) to sub-section (1) of section 1 of the
principal Act to require the 
petitioner to show that she is prevented
from taking proceedings in the 
Court of the Country in which she is
domiciled shall include power to 
require her to show that she is
similarly prevented from taking 
proceedings in the High Court in
England, or, as the case may be, the 
Court of Session,
4.
 
Registration in England and Scotland of decrees and
Orders under 
principal Act
 :-
This section substituted sub-section (2) and 
amended, sub-section
(3) of section 1 of the principal Act - see that 
Act, ante.]
5.
 
Application to Burma and Colonies
 :-
1
 
.- The foregoing provisions of this Act shall, with the necessary
adaptations, apply in relation to any part of His Majesty's
dominions to 
which the provisions of S.1 of the Indian and Colonial
Divorce 
Jurisdiction Act, 1926 apply by virtue of an Order in Council
under 
section 2 thereof, wherever made, as they would have
applied in relation 
to India, if Independence Act, 1947, had not
passed.
1. Section reads thus after being amended by 
the Burma
Independence Act, 1947, and the Colonial and Other Territories
(Divorce Jurisdiction) Act, 1950.
6.
 
Areas for which the various High Courts in India arc to
act
 :-
(1) A High Court in India on which 
jurisdiction is conferred by sub-
section (1) of section 1 of the 
principal Act shall, on and after the
appointed day. exercise that 
jurisdiction if, and only if, the parties
to the marriage last resided 
together, or at the date of the
presentation of the petition each 
reside, in the appropriate area.(2) In this section the expression "the 
appropriate area" means, in
relation to any Court, the area with 
reference to which that Court is
for the time being a High Court for the 
purposes of the Indian Law
known as Divorce Act, 1869 , or such other 
area as the Gove:rnnor-
General may from time to time by public 
notification specify, in
relation to that Court as the appropriate area 
for the purposes of
this section.
(3) The functions of the Governor-General 
under this section shall
be deemed, for the purposes of Government of 
India Act, 1935 , to
be included among the functions which he is, by or 
under that Act
required to exercise in his discretion and so much of 
S.18A of the
Interpretation Act, 1889, as provides that the expression
"Governor-General" shall in relation to the period between the
commencement of Part III of Government of India Act, 1935 , and
the 
establishment of the Federation of India, mean the Governor-
General in 
Council shall not apply to this section.
7.
 
Meaning of "appointed day"
 :-
In this Act the 
expression "the appointed day" means the first day
of January nineteen 
hundred and forty-one.
8.
 
Short title and citation
 :-
This Act may be cited as Indian and 
Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction
Act, 1940 , and the principal Act and this 
Act may be cited together
as Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction 
Acts, 1926 and 1940.
1 
 THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
PREAMBLE  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Extent.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. Interpretation  clause . 
PART I 
THE PERSONS BY WHOM MARRIAGES MAY BE SOLEMNIZED  
4. Marriages to be solemnized according to Act . 
5. Persons by whom marriages may be solemnized . 
6. Grant and revocation of licenses to solemnize marriages . 
7. Marriage Registrars . 
Senior Marriage Registrar.  
Magistrate when to be marriage Registrar . 
8. [Repealed .]. 
9. Licensing of persons to grant certificates of marriage between Indian Christians.  
PART II  
TIME AND PLACE AT WHICH  MARRIAGES  MAY BE SOLEMNIZED  
10. Time for solemnizing marriage.  
Exceptions.  
11. Place for solemnizing marriage . 
Fee for special license.  
PART III  
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY MINISTERS O F RELIGION  LICENSED UNDER THIS ACT 
12. Notice of intended marriage.  
13. Publication of such notice.  
Return or transfer of notice.  
14. Notice of intended marriage in private dwelling.  
15. Sending copy of notice to Marriage Registrar when one party is a minor.  
16. Procedure on receipt of notice.  
17. Issue of certificate of notice given and declaration made.  
Proviso.  
18. Declaration before issue of certificate.  
19. Consent of father, or guardian, or mother.  
20. Power to prohibit by notice issue of certificate . 
21. Procedure on receipt of notice . 
22. Issue of certificate in case of minority.  
23. Issue of certificates to Indian Christians.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Form of certificate . 
25. Solemnization of marriage.  
26. Certificate void if marriage not solemnized within two months . 
PART IV  
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY MINISTERS OF RELIGION  
27. Marriages when to be registered . 
28. Registration of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of Church of England.  
29. Quarterly returns to Archdeaconry.  
Contents of returns.  
30. Registration and returns of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of Church of  Rome.  
31. Registration and returns of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of Church of Scotland.  
32. Certain marriages to be registered in duplicate . 
33. Entries of such marriages to be signed and attested . 
34. Certificate to be forwarded to Marriage Registrar, copied and sent to Registrar General.  
35. Copies of certificates to be entered and numbered.  
36. Registrar to add number o f entry to certificate, and send  to Registrar General.  
37. Registration of marriages between Indian Christians, by persons referred to in clauses ( 1), (2) and 
(3) of section 5.  
Custody and disposal of register -book.  
PART V 
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY , OR IN THE PRESENCE OF, A  MARRIAGE REGISTRAR  
38. Notice of intended marriage before Marriage Registrar.  
39. Publication of notice.  
40. Notice to be filed and copy entered in Marriage Notice Book.  
41. Certificate of notice given and oath made.  
Proviso.  
42. Oath before issue of certificate.  
43. Petition to High Court to order certificate in less than fourteen days.  
Order on petition . 
44. Consent of father  or guardian.  
Protest against issue of certificate.  
Effect of protest.  
45. Petition where person who se consent is necessary is insan e, or unjustly withholds consent.  
Procedure on petition.  
46. Petition when Marriage Registrar refuses certificate.  
Procedure on peti tion.  
47. [Repealed .]. 
48. Petition when Registrar doubts authority of person for  bidding . 
Procedure on petition.  
49. Liability for frivolous protest against issue of certificate.  
50. Form of certificate . 
51. Solemnization of marriage after issue of certificate.  
52. When marriage  not had within two months after notice, new notice required . 
53. Marriage Registrar may ask for particulars to be registered.  
54. Registration of marriages solemnized under part V.  
  3 
 SECTIONS  
55. Certificates to be sent monthly to Registrar General . 
Custody of regist er-book . 
56. [Repealed .]. 
57. Registrars to ascertain that notice and certificate are understood by Indian Christians.  
58. Indian Christians to be made to understand declarations.  
59. Registration of marriages between Indian Christians.  
PART VI 
MARRIAGE OF INDIAN  CHRISTIANS  
60. On what conditions marriages of Indian Christians may be certified.  
61. Grant of certificate . 
62. Keeping of register -book and deposit of extracts there from with Registrar General . 
63. Searches in register -book and copies of entries.  
64. Books in which marriages  of Indian Christians under Part I or Part III are registered . 
65. Part VI not to apply to Roman Catholics.  
Saving of certain marriages.  
PART VII 
PENALTIES  
66. False oath, declaration, notice or certificate for procuring marriage . 
67. Forbidding, by false personation issue of certificate by Marriage Registrar . 
68. Solemnizing marriage without due authority . 
69. Solemnizing marriage out of proper time, or without witnesses.  
Saving of marriages solemnized under special li cense. 
70. Solemnizing without notice or within fourteen days after notice, marriage with minor.  
71. Issuing certificate, or marrying, without publication of notice;  
Marrying after expiry of notice;  
Solemnizing, marriage with minor within fourteen days, without authority of Court, or without 
sending copy of notice;  
issuing certificate against authori zed prohibition . 
72. Issuing certificate after expiry of notice, or, in case of minor, within fourteen days a fter notice, or 
against authoriz ed prohibition . 
73. Persons authorized to solemnize marriage (other than Clergy of Churches of England, Scotland or 
Rome) ; 
issuing certificate, or marrying, without publishing notice , or after expiry of                     
certificate;  
issuing certificate for,  or solemnizing, marriage with minor, within fourteen days after notice;  
issuing certif icate authorizedly forbidden ; 
solemnizing marriage authorizedly forbidden . 
74. Unlicensed person granting certificate pretending to be licensed.  
75.  Destroying or falsifying register -books.  
76. Limitation of prosecutions under Act . 
PART VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
77. What matters need not be proved in respect of marriage in accordance with Act.  
78. Corrections of errors . 
79. Searches and copies of entries.  4 
 SECTIONS  
80. Certified copy of entry in marriage -register, etc., to be evidence.  
81. Certificates of certain marriages to be sent to Ce ntral Government.  
82. State Government to prescribe fees.  
83. Power to make rules.  
84. [Repealed .]. 
85. Power to declare who shall be District Judge.  
86. [Repealed .]. 
87. Saving of Consular marriages.  
88. Non-validation of marriages within prohibited degrees.  
SCHEDULE I. —NOTICE OF MARRIAGE.  
SCHEDULE II. —CERTIFICATE OF RECEIPT OF NOTICE.  
SCHEDULE III. —FORM OR  REGISTER OF MARRIAGES . 
SCHEDULE IV. —MARRIAGE  REGISTER -BOOK. 
CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE . 
SCHEDULE V. —[Repealed. ]. 
  5 
  
THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872  
ACT NO. 15 OF 1872  
[18th July, 1872.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the solemnization  in India of the marriages 
of Christians.  
PREAMBLE .—WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law  relating to the solemnization 
in India of the marriages of persons  professing the Christian religion ;  It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Indian Christian  Marriage Act, 1872.  
Extent .—1[It extends to the whole of India 2[except 3[the territories which, immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were  comprised in the States] of Travancore -Cochin, Manipur and 4***].]5 
6*    *   *    *    * 
2. [Enactments repealed .]—Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Interpretation clause .—In this Act, unless there is something  repugnan t in the subject or 
context, — 
“Church  of England”  and “Anglican ”.—mean and apply  to the  Church of  England as by law 
established;  
“Church of Scotland ”.—means the Church of Scotland as by law  established ; 
“Church of Rome” and “Roman Catholic ”.—mean and apply to the Church  which regards the Pope 
of Rome as its spiritual head;  
“Church ”.—includes any chapel or other building generally used for  public Chr istian worship ; 
7[“India ”.—means the 8[territories] to which this Act extends;]  
“minor ”.—“minor ” means a person who has not completed the age of twenty -one years and who is 
not a widower or a widow;  
9*    *    *    *    *  
the expression “Christians”  means persons professing the Christian  religion;  
10[and the expression “Indian Christians ” includes the Christian  descendants of natives of India 
converted to Christia nity, as well a s such converts;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by A.O. 1950 for the second para., as amended by A.O. 1937 and A.O. 1948 . [NOTE: --The Act does not extend to the 
State of Manipur, vide Act 30 of 1950, s. 3( 2A) and Sch. As amended by Act 68 of 1956, s. 2. The Act has been extended to and 
brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I .] 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “except Part B States”.  
3. Subs. by the Adaption of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “the States”.  
4. The words “State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
5. In its application to Pondicherry, in section 1, the following proviso shall be added at the end of section 1 — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of Pondicherry.” —                 
(vide Act 26 of 1968).  
6. The commencement cl. rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and the Schedule.  
7. Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch.  
8. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “territory comprised in the States”.  
9. The definition of “Nati ve State” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
10. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for the definition.  6 
 1[“Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages ”.—means a  Registrar General of Births, Deaths 
and Marriages appointed under the  Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886 (6 of 1886).]  
PART I 
THE PERSONS BY WHOM MARRIAGES MAY BE SOLEMNIZED  
4. Marriages to be solemnized according to Act .—Every marriage  between persons, one or both of 
whom is 2[or are] a Christian or  Christians, shall be solemnized in accordance with the provisions of  the 
next following section; and any such marriage solemnized otherwise  than in accordance with such 
provisions shall be void.  
5. Persons by whom marriages may be solemnized. —Marriages may be solemnized  in 3[India] — 
(1) by any person who ha s received episcopal ordination , provided that the marriage be 
solemnized according to the  rules, rites, ceremonies and customs of the Church of which he is a  
Minister ; 
(2) by any  Clergyman of the Church of Scotland, provided that such  marriage be solemnized 
according to the rules, rites, ceremonies and  customs of the Church of Scotland ; 
(3) by any Minister of Religion licensed under this Act to solemnize  marriages;  
(4) by, or in the presence of, a Marriage Registrar appointed under  this Act;  
(5) by any person licensed under this Act to grant certificates  of marriage between 4[Indian ] 
Christians.  
5[6. Grant and revocation of licenses to solemnize marriages .—The State Government, so far as 
regards the territories under its  administration, 6*** may, by notification in the Official Gazette 7***, 
grant licenses to Ministers of Religion to solemnize marriages  within such territories 8*** and may, by a 
like notification  revoke such licenses.]  
7. Marriage Registrars. —The State Government may appoint one or  more Christians, either by 
name or as holding any office for the time  being, to be the Marriage Registrar or Marriage Registrars for 
any district subject to its administra tion. 
Senior Marriage Registrar .—Where there are more Marriage  Registrars than one in any district, the 
State Government shall  appoint one of them to be the Senior Marriage Registrar.  
Magistrate  when to be Marriage Registrar .—When there is only one  Marriag e Registrar in a 
district, and such Registrar is absent from  such district, or ill, or when his office is temporarily vacant, the  
Magistrate of the district shall act as, and be, Marriage Registrar  thereof during such absence, illness, or 
temporary vacancy . 
STATE AMENDMENT  
KARNATAKA  
In section 7, for the words, “Magistrate of the district” the words “District Magistrate” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 13 of 19 65, s. 67 and Schedule .] 
8. [Marriage Registrars in Indian States. ]—Rep.,  by the A. O . 1950.  
9. Licensing of persons to grant certificates of marriage between  Indian Christians .—The State 
Government 9*** may grant a license to  any Christian, either by name or as holding any office for the 
time being, authorizing him to grant certificates of marriage between  4[Indian] Christians.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30.  
2. Ins. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule.  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “Part A States and Part C States”.  
4. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Native”.  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 1, for s. 6.  
6. The words “and the Central Government, so far as regards any Indian State” omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
7. The words “or in the Gazette of India, as the case may be” omitted  by the A.O. 1937.  
8. The words “and State, respectively,” omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
9. The words  and brackets  “or (so far as regard any Indian State) the Central Government” omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  7 
  Any such license may be revoked by the authority by which it was  granted, and every such grant or 
revocation shall be notified in the  Official Gazette.  
PART II 
TIME AND PLACE AT WHICH  MARRIAGES  MAY BE SOLEMNIZED  
10. Time for solemnizing marriage .—Every marriage under this Act  shall be solemnized between 
the hours of six in the morning and seven  in the evening:  
Exceptions .—Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to — 
(1) a Clergyman of the Church of England so lemnizing a marriage under a special license 
permitting him to do so at any hour other than between six in the morning and seven in the 
evening, under the hand and seal of the Anglican Bishop of th e Diocese or his Commissary, or  
(2) a Clergyman of the Chur ch of Rome solemnizing a marriage between the hours of seven 
in the evening and six in the morning, when he has received a general or special license in that 
behalf from the Roman Catholic Bishop of the Diocese or Vicariate in which such marriage is so 
solemnized, or from such person as the same Bishop has authorized to grant such license, 1[or  
(3) a Clergyman of the Church of Scotland solemnizing a marriage according to the rules, 
rites, ceremonies and customs of the Church of Scotland.]  
11. Place for solemnizing marriage. —No Clergyman of the Church of  England shall solemnize a 
marriage in any place other than a church2[where worship is generally held according to the forms of the  
Church of England],  
unless there is no 2[such] church within five miles distance by  the shortest road from such place, or  
unless he has received a special license authorizing him to do so  under the hand and seal of the 
Anglican Bishop of the Diocese or his  Commissary.  
Fee for special license .—For such special license, the Registrar  of the Diocese may charge such 
additional fee as the said Bishop from  time to time authorizes . 
PART III 
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY MINISTERS OF RELIGION  LICENSED UNDER THIS ACT 
12. Notice of intended marriage .—Whenever a marriage is intended  to be solemnized by a Minister 
of Religion licensed to solemnize  marriages under this Act — 
one of the persons intending marriage shall give notice in  writing, according to the form contained in 
the First Schedule hereto  annexed, or to the like effect, to the Min ister of Religion whom he or  she desires 
to solemnize the marriage, and shall state  therein — 
(a) the name and surname, and the profession or condition, of each of the persons intending 
marriage,  
(b) the dwelling -place of each of them,  
(c) the time during which each has dwelt there, and  
(d) the church or private dwelling in which the marr iage is to be solemnized:  
Provided that, if either of such persons has dwelt in the place  mentioned in the notice during more 
than one month, it may be stated  therein that he or she has dwelt there one month and upwards.  
13. Publication of such notice .—If the persons intending marriage  desire it to be solemnized in a 
particular church, and if the Minister  of Religion to whom such notice has been delivered be entitled to  
officiate therein, he shall cause the notice to be affixed in some  conspicuous part of such church.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 2.  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 8 
 Return or transfer of notice .—But if he is not entitled to  officiate as a Minister in such church, he 
shall, at his option,  either return the notice, to the person who delivered it to him, or  deliver it to some 
other Minister entitled to officiate therein, who  shall thereupon cause the notice to be affixed as aforesaid.  
14. Notice of intended marriage in private dwelling. —If it be  intended that the marriage sh all be 
solemnized in a private dwelling,  the Minister of Religion, on receiving the notice prescribed in                 
section 12, shall forward it to the Marriage Registrar of the  district, who shall affix the same to some 
conspicuous place in his  own of fice. 
15. Sending copy of notice  to Marriage Registrar when one party is  a minor. —When one of the 
persons intending marriage is a minor, every  Minister receiving such notice shall, unless within                 
twenty -four hours after its receipt he returns the same under the provisions of  section 13, send by the post 
or otherwise a copy of such notice to the  Marriage Registrar of the district, or, if there be more than one  
Registrar of such district, to the Senior Marriage Registrar.  
16. Procedure on  receipt of notice. —The Marriage Registrar or  Senior Marriage Registrar, as the 
case may be, on receiving any such  notice, shall affix it to some conspicuous place in his own office,  and 
the latter shall further cause a copy of the said notice to be  sent t o each of the other Marriage Registrars in 
the same district,  who shall likewise publish the same in the manner above directed.  
17. Issue of certificate of notice given and declaration made. —Any Minister of Religion 
consenting or intending to solemnize any  such marriage as aforesaid, shall, on being required so to do by 
or on  behalf of the person by whom the notice was given, and upon one of the  persons intending marriage 
making the declaration herein  after required, issue under his hand a certificate of su ch notice having  been 
given and of suc h declaration having been made:  
Proviso .—Provided — 
(1) that no such certificate shall be issued until the expiration of four days after the date of the 
receipt of the notice by such Minister;  
(2) that no lawful impediment be shown to his satisfaction why su ch certificate should not issue ; 
and  
(3) that the issue of such certificate has not been forbidden, in manner hereinafter mentioned, by 
any person authorized in that behalf.  
18. Declaration before issue of cer tificate .—The certificate  mentioned in section 17 shall not be 
issued until one of the persons  intending marriage has appeared personally before the Minister and  made 
a solemn declaration — 
(a) that he or she believes that there is not any impediment of kindred or affinity, or other lawful 
hindrance, to the said marriage,  
And, when either or both of the parties is or are a minor or minors,  
(b) that the consent o r consents required by law has or have been obtained thereto,  or that there is 
no person re sident in India having authority to give such consent, as the case may be.  
19. Consent of father, or guardian, or mother .—The father, if  living, of any minor, or, if the father 
be dead the guardian of the  person of such minor, and, in case there be no such guardian, then the  mother 
of such minor, may give consent to the minor ’s marriage,  
and such consent is hereby required for the same marriage, unless  no person authorized to give such 
conse nt be resident in India.  
20. Power to prohibit by notice issue of certificate .—Every  person whose consent to a marriage is 
required under section 19, is  hereby authorized to prohibit the issue of the certificate by any  Minister, at 
any time before the issu e of the same, by notice in  writing to such Min ister, subscribed by the person  so 
authorized with is or her name and place of abode and position with respect to either  of the persons 
intending marriage, by reason of which he or she is so  authorized as aforesaid.  
21. Procedure on receipt of notice. —If any such notice be  received by such Minister, he shall not 
issue his certificate and  shall not solemnize the said marriage until he has examined into the  matter of the 
said prohibition, and is satisfied tha t the person  prohibiting the marriage has no lawful authority for such 
prohibition,  9 
 or until the said notice is withdrawn by the person who gave it.  
22. Issue of certificate in case of minority. —When either of the  persons intending marriage is a 
minor, an d the Minister is not  satisfied that the consent of the person whose consent to such  marriage is 
required by section 19 has been obtained, such Minister  shall not issue such certificate until the expiration 
of fourteen days  after the receipt by him of the notice of marriage.  
23. Issue of certificates to Indian Christians .—When any1[Indian ] Christian s about to be married 
takes a notice of marriage to  a Minister of Religion, or applies for a certificate from such  Minister under 
section 17, such Minister shall, before  issuing the certificate, ascertain whether such 1[Indian ] Christian s 
is cognizant of the purport and effect of the said notice or  certificate, as the case may be, and, if not, shall 
translate or cause  to be translated the notice or certificat e to such 1[Indian ] Christian into some language 
which he understands.  
24. Form of certificate .—The certificate to be issued by such  Minister shall be in the form contained 
in the Second Schedule hereto  annexed, or to the like effect.  
25. Solemnization of marriage .—After the issue of the certificate  by the Minister, marriage may be 
solemnized between the persons  therein described according to such form or ceremony as t he Minister 
thinks fit to adopt:  
Provided that the marriage be solemnized in the presence of at  least two witnesses besides the 
Minister.  
26. Certificate void if marriage not solemnized within two  months .—Whenever a marriage is not 
solemnized within two months after  the date of the certificate issued by such Minister as aforesaid, such  
certificate and all proceedings (if any) thereon shall be void,  
and no person shall proceed to solemnize the said marriage until  new notice has been given and a 
certificate thereof issued in manner  aforesaid.  
PART IV 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED B Y MINISTERS OF RELIGION  
27. M arriages when to be registered. —All marriages hereafter  solemnized in 2[India] between 
persons one or both of whom professes  or profess the Christian religion, except marriages solemnized 
under  Part V or Part VI of this Act, shall be registered3 in manner  hereinafter prescribed.  
28. Registration of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of Church of  England .—Every 
Clergyman of  the Church of England shall keep a  register of marriages and shall register therein, 
according to the  tabular form set forth in the Third Schedule hereto annexed, every  marriage which he 
solemnizes under this Act.  
29. Quarterly returns to Archdeaconry. —Every Clergyman of the  Church of England shall send 
four times in every year returns induplicate, authenticated by his signature, of the entries in the  register of 
marriages solemnized at any place where he has any  spiritual charge, to the Registrar of the Archdeaconry 
to which he is  subject, or within the limits of which such place is situate.  
Content s of returns .—Such quarterly returns shall contain all the  entries of marriages contained in 
the said register from the first day  of January to the thirty -first day of March, from the first day of  April to 
the thirtieth day of June, from the first day of J uly to the  thirtieth day of September, and from the first day 
of October to the  thirty -first day of December, of each year, respectively, and shall be  sent by such 
Clergyman  within two weeks from the expiration of each of  the quarters above specified.  
The said Registrar upon receiving the said returns shall send one  copy thereof to the 4[Registrar 
General of Births, Deaths and  Marriages].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Native”.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.  
3. As to the establishment of general registry offices of births, deaths and marriages, see the  Biths, Deaths and Marriages 
Registra tion Act, 1886 (6 of 1886), Ch. II.  
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30 , for “Secretary to the L . G.”. 10 
 30. Registration and returns of marriages solemnized by Clergymen  of Church of Rome .—
Every marriage solemnized by a Clergyman of the  Church of Rome shall be registered by the person and 
according to the  form directed in that behalf by the Roman Catholic Bishop of the  Diocese or Vicariate in 
which such marriage is solemnized,  
and such person shall forward quarterly to t he 1[Registrar  General of Births, Deaths and Marriages] 
returns of the entries of all  marriages registered by him during the three months next preceding.  
31. Registration and returns of marriages solemnized by Clergymen  of Church of Scotland .—
Every Clergyman of the Church of Scotland shall  keep a register of marriages,  
and shall register therein, according to the tabular form set  forth in the Third Schedule hereto 
annexed, every marriage which he  solemnizes under this Act,  
and shall forward quarterl y to the 1[Registrar General of  Births, Deaths and Marriages], through the 
Senior Chaplain of the  Church  of Scotland, returns, similar to those prescribed in section 29, of  all such 
marriages.  
32. Certain marriages to be registered in duplicate .—Every  marriage solemnized by any person 
who has received episcopal ordination, but who is not a Clergyman of the Church of England, or of  the 
Church of Rome, or by any Minister of Religion licensed under this  Act to solemnize marriages, shall 
immediately after t he solemnization  thereof, be registered in duplicate by the person solemnizing the 
same; (that is to say) in a marriage -register book to be kept by him for  that purpose, according to the form 
contained in the Fourth Schedule  hereto annexed, and also in a c ertificate attached to the marriage -
register -book as a counterfoil.  
33. Entries of such marriages to be signed and attested .—The entry  of such marriage in both the 
certificate and marriage -register -book  shall be signed by the person solemnizing the marriag e, and also by  
the persons married, and shall be attested by two credible witnesses,  other than the person solemnizing 
the marriage, present at its  solemnization.  
Every such entry shall be made in order from the beginning to the  end of the book, and the nu mber of 
the certificate shall correspond  with that of the entry in the marriage -register -book.  
34. Certificate to be forwarded to Marriage Registrar, copied and  sent to Registrar  General. —
The person solemnizing the marriage shall  forthwith separate the certificate from the marriage -register -
book and  send it, within one month from the time of the solemnization, to the  Marriage Registrar of the 
district in which the marriage was  solemnized, or, if there be more Marriage Registrars than one, to the  
Senior M arriage Registrar,  
who shall cause such certificate to be copied into a book to be  kept by him for that purpose,  
and shall send all the certificates which he has received during  the month, with such number and 
signature or initials added thereto as  are h ereinafter required, to the 1[Registrar General of Births,  Deaths 
and Marriages].  
35. Copies of certifica tes to be entered and numbered. —Such copies shall be entered in order from 
the beginning to the end of the  said book, and shall bear both the number of  the certificate as  copied, and 
also a number to be entered by the Marriage  Registrar, indicating the number of the entry of the said copy 
in the  said book, according to the order in which he receives each  certificate.  
36. Registrar to add number o f entry  to certificate, and send  to Registrar General .—The 
Marriage Registrar shall also add such last -mentioned number of the entry of the copy in the book to the  
certificate, with his signature or initials, and shall, at the end of  every month, send the same to the 
1[Registrar General of Births,  Deaths and Marriages].  
37. Registration of marriages between Indian Christians, by  persons referred to in clauses ( 1), 
(2) and ( 3) of section 5. —Whenany marriage between 2[India n] Christians is solemnized 3[by any  such 
person, Clergyman or Minister of Religion as is referred to in  clause ( 1), clause ( 2) or clause ( 3) of 
section 5],  the person  solemnizing the same shall, instead of proceeding in the manner  provided by 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30, for “Secretary to the L. G.”. 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Native”.  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1928, s. 2 and the first Schedule , for “under Part I or Part III or this Act”.  11 
 sections 28 to 36, both inclusive, register the marriage  in a separate register -book, and shall keep it safely 
until it is  filled, or, if he leave the district in which he solemnized the  marriage before the said book is 
filled, shall make over the same to  the person succeeding to  his duties in the said district.  
Custody and disposal of register -book .—Whoever has the control of  the book at the time when it is 
filled, shall send it to the Marriage  Registrar of the district, or, if there be more Marriage Registrars  than 
one, to the Senior Marriage Registrar, who shall send it to the  1[Registrar General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages,] to be kept by  him with the records of h is office.  
PART V 
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY , OR IN THE PRESENCE OF, A MARRIAGE REGISTRAR  
38. Notice of intended marriage before Marriage Registrar .—When a  marriage is intended to be 
solemnized by, or in the presence of, a  Marriage Registrar, one of the parties to such marriage shall give  
notice in writing, in the form contained in the First Schedule hereto  annexed, or to the like effect, to any 
Marriage Registrar of the  district within which the parties have dwelt,  
or, if the parties dwell in different districts, shall give the  like notice to a Marr iage Registrar of each 
district,  
and shall state therein the name an d surname, and the profession  or condition, of each of the parties 
intending marriage, the dwelling -place of each of them, the time during which each has dwelt therein,  and 
the place at which th e marriage is to be solemnized:  
Provided that, if either party  has dwelt in the place stated in  the notice for more than one month, it 
may be stated therein that he  or she has dwelt there one month and upwards.  
39. Publication of notice. —Every Marriage Registrar shall, on  receiving any such notice, cause a 
copy there of to be affixed in some  conspicuous place in his office.  
When one of the parties intending marriage is a minor, every  Marriage Registrar shall, within twenty -
four hours after the receipt  by him of the notice of such marriage, send, by post or otherwise, a copy of  
such notice to each of the other Marriage Registrars (if any)  in the same district, who shall like wise affix 
the copy in some con spicuous place in his own office.  
40. Notice to be filed and copy entered in Marriage Notice Book. —The Marriage Registrar shall 
file all such notices and keep them with  the records of his office,  
and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of all such notices in a  book to be furnished to him for that 
purpose by the State Government,  and to be called the “Marriage Not ice Book ”, 
and the Marriage Notice Book shall be open at all reasonable times,  without fee, to all persons 
desirous of inspecting the same.  
41. Certificate  of notice given and oath made. —If the party by  whom the notice was given requests 
the Marriage Registrar to issue the  certificate next hereinafter mentioned, and if one of the parties 
intending  marriage has made oath as hereinafter required, the  Marriage Registrar shall issue under his 
hand a certificate of such  notice having been given an d of such oath having been made : 
Proviso .—Provided — 
that no lawful impediment be shown to his satisfaction why such  certificate should not issue;  
that the issue of such certificate has not been forbidden, in  manner hereinafter mentioned, by any 
person autho rized in that behalf by this Act ; 
that four days after the rec eipt of the notice have expired ; and further,  
that where, by such oath, it appears that one of the parties intending  marriage is a minor, fourteen 
days after the entry of such notice  have expired.  
42. Oath before issue of certificate .—The certificate mentioned in section  41 shall not be issued by 
any Marriage Registrar, until one of the  parties intending marriage appears personally before such 
Marriage  Registrar, and makes oath2— 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30, for “Secretary to the Local Government.”.  
2. As to the meaning of “oath”, see the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3(37) and s. 4.  12 
 (a) that he or she believes that there is not any impediment of kindred or affinity, or other lawful 
hindr ance, to the said marriage, and  
(b) that both the parties have, or (where they have dwelt in the districts of different Marriage 
Registrars) that the party making such o ath has, had their, his or her usual place of abode within the 
district of such Marriage Registrar,  
and, where either or each of the parties is a minor,  
(c) that the consent or consents to such marriage required by law has or have been obtained 
thereto, o r that there is no person resident in India authorized to give such consent, as the case may 
be. 
43. Petition to High Court to order certificate in less than fourteen  days .—When one of the 
parties intending marriage is a minor, and  both such parties are at the time resident in any of the towns of 
Calcutta , Madras and Bombay, and are desirous of being married in less than  fourteen days after the entry 
of such notice as aforesaid, they may apply by petition to a Judge of the High Cour t, for an order upon the  
Marriage Registrar to whom the notice of marriage has been given, directing  him to issue his certificate 
before the expiration of the said  fourteen days required by section 41.  
Order on petition .—And on sufficient cause being shown, the said Judge  may, in his discretion, 
make an order upon such Marriage Registrar , directing him to issue his certificate at any time to be 
mentioned  in the said order before the expiration of the fourteen days so  requi red.  
And the said Marriage Registrar, on receipt of the said order, shall  issue his certificate in accordance 
therewith . 
44. Consent of father or guardian. —The provisions of section 19  apply to every marriage under this 
Part, either of the parties to  whic h is a minor ;  
Protest against issue of certificate .—And any person whose consent  to such marriage would be 
required thereunder  may enter a  protest against the issue of the Marriage Registrar ’s certificate, by 
writing , at any time before the issue of such certificate, the word  “forbidden ” opposite to the entry of the 
notice of such intended marriage  in the Marriage Notice Book, and by subscribing thereto his  or her name 
and place of abode, and his or her position with respect to  either of the parties, by reason of which he or 
she is so authorized . 
Effect of protest .—When such protest has been entered, no certificate  shall issue until the Marriage 
Registrar has examined into the  matter of the protest, and is satisfied th at it ought not to obstruct  the issue 
of the certificate for the said marriage, or until the  protest be withdrawn by the person who entered it.  
45. Petition where person who se consent is necessary is insan e, or unjustly  withholds consent .—
If any person whose consent is necessary to  any marriage under this Part is of unsound mind,  
or if any such person (other than the father) without just cause withholds  his consent to the marriage,  
the parties intending marriage may apply by petition, whe re the person  whose consent is necessary is 
resident within any of the towns of  Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, to a Judge of the High Court, or if he  
is not resident within any of the said towns, then to the District  Judge : 
Procedure on petition. —And the said Judge of the High Court, or District  Judge, as the case may be, 
may examine the allegations of the petition  in a summary way;  
and, if upon examination such marriage appears proper , such Judge of  the High Court or District 
Judge, as the case m ay be, shall declare the  marriage to be a proper marriage.  
Such declaration shall be as effectual as if the person whose consent  was needed had consented to the 
marriage;  
and, if he has forbidden the issue of the Marriage Registrar ’s certificate , such ce rtificate shall be 
issued and the like proceedings  may be had under this Part in relation to the marriage as if the issue of  
such cer tificate had not been forbidden.  
46. Petition when Marriage Registrar refuses certificate. —Whenever  a Marriage Registrar refuses 
to issue a certificate under this Part,  either of the parties intending marriage may apply by petition, where 13 
 the district of such Registrar is within any of the towns of Calcutta, Madras  and Bombay, to a Judge of 
the High Court, or if such distric t is not within any of the said towns, then to the District Judge.  
Procedure on petition .—The said Judge of the High Court, or District  Judge, as the case may be, 
may examine the allegations of the petition  in a summary way, and shall decide thereon.  
The decision of such Judge of the High Court or District Judge, as  the case may be, shall be final, and 
the Marriage Registrar to whom the  application for the issue of a certificate was originally made shall  
proceed in accordance therewith.  
47. [Petition when  Marriage Registrar in Indian State refuses  certificate .] Omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
48. Petition when Registrar doubts authority of person forbidding .—Whenever a Marriage 
Registrar, acting under the provisions of section  44, is not satisfied that the person forbidding the issue of 
the certificate is authorized by law so to do, the said Marriage Registrar  shall apply by petition, where his 
district is within any of the  towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, to a Judge of th e High Court , or if 
such district be not within any of the said towns, then to  the District Judge.  
Procedure on petition. —The said petition shall state all the circumstances  of the case, and pray for 
the order and direction of the Court  concerning the sam e,  
and the said Judge of the High Court or District Judge, as thecae  may be, shall examine into the 
allegations of the petition and the  circumstances of the case,  
and if, upon such examination, it appears, that the person forbid ding the issue of such cer tificate is not 
authorized by law so to do, such  Judge of the High Court or District Judge, as the case may be, shall  
declare that the person forbidding the issue of such certificate  is not authorized as aforesaid,  
and thereupon such certificate sh all be i ssued, and the like pro ceedings may be had in relation to such 
marriage as if the issue had not  been forbidden.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
49. Liability for frivolous protest against issue of certificate .—Every person entering a protest with 
the Marriage Registrar, under this  Part, against the issue of any certificate, on grounds which such 
Marriage  Registrar, under section 44, or a Judge of the High Court or the  District Judge, under section 45 
or 46, decl ares to be frivolous and  such as ought not to obstruct the issue of the certificate, shall be  liable 
for the costs of all proceedings in relation thereto and for damages , to be recovered by suit by the person 
against whose marriage such  protest was entered . 
50. Form of certificate .—The certificate to be issued by the Marriage  Registrar under the provisions 
of section 41 shall be in the  form contained in the Second Schedule to this Act annexed or to the like  
effect,  
and the State Government shall furnish to  every Marriage Regis trar a sufficient number of forms of 
certificate.  
51. Solemnization of marriage after issue of certificate .—After  the issue of the certificate of the 
Marriage Registrar, or, where  notice is required to be given under this Act to the Ma rriage  Registrars for 
different district s, after the issue of the certi ficates of the Marriage Registrars for such districts,  
marriage may, if there be no lawful impediment to the marriage of the  parties described in such 
certif icate or certificates, be so lemnized between them, according to such form and ceremony as they 
think  fit to adopt.  
But every such marriage shall be solemnized in the presence of some  Marriage Registrar (to whom 
shall be delivered such certificate or  certificates as aforesaid), and of  two or more credible witnesses  
besides  the Marriage Registrar . 
And in some part of the ceremony each of the parties shall declare  as follows, or to the like effect: — 
“I do solemnly declare that I know not of any lawful impediment why  I, A. B., may not be joined in 
matrimony to C. D. ” 
                                                           
1. Omitted  by the A. O. 1950.  14 
 And each of the parties shall say to the other as follows or to the  like effect :— 
“I call upon these persons here present to witness that I, A. B., do take thee, C. D ., to be my lawful 
wedded wife [or husband]. ” 
52.When marriage not had within two months after notice, new notice  required .—Whenever a 
marriage is not solemnized within two  months after the copy of the notice has been entered by the 
Marriage  Registrar, as required by section 40, the notice and the cer tificate , if any, issued thereupon, and 
all other proceedings thereupon , shall be void;  
and no person shall proceed to solemnize the marriage, nor shall any  Marriage Registrar enter the 
same, until new notice has been given , and entry made, and certificate  thereof given, at the time and in  the 
manner aforesaid.  
53. Marriage Registrar may ask for particulars to be registered .—A Marriage Registrar before 
whom any marriage is solemnized under this  Part may ask of the persons to be married the several 
particula rs required to be registered touching such marriage.  
54. Registration of marriages solemnized under part V .—After the  solemnization of any marriage 
under this Part, the Marriage Registrar  present at such solemnization shall forthwith register the marriage 
induplicate; that is to say, in a marriage -register -book, according to  the form of the Fourth Schedule 
hereto annexed, and also in a  certificate attached to the marriage -register -book as a  counterfoil.  
The entry of such marriage in both the certificate s and the  marriage -register -book shall be signed by 
the person by or before whom  the marriage has been solemnized, if there be any such person, and by  the 
Marriage Registrar present at such m arriage, whether or not it is  solemnized by him, and also by the 
parties married, and attested by  two credible witnesses other than the Marriage Registrar and person  
solemnizing the marriage.  
Every such entry shall be made in order from the beginning to t he end of the book, and the number of 
the certificate shall correspond  with that of the entry in the marriage -register -book.  
55. Certificates to be sen t monthly to Registrar General. —The Marriage Registrar shall forthwith 
separate the certificate from the marriage -register -book and send it, at the end of every month, to 
the1[Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages].  
Custody of register -book .—The Marriage Registrar shall keep safely  the said register -book until it is 
filled, and shall then send it  to the 1[Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages], to be kept  by him 
with the records of his office.  
56. [Officers to whom Registrars in Indian States shall send certificates .) Omitted by the A. O . 1950 . 
57. Registrars to ascertain that notice and certificate are understood  by Indian Christians .—
When any 2[Indian ] Christian s about  to be married gives a notice of marriage, or applies for a certificate  
from a Marriage Registrar, such Marriage Registrar shall ascertain  whether the said 2[Indian ] Christian s 
understands the English   language, and, if he does not, the Marriage Registrar shall translate,  or cause to 
be translated, such notice or certificate, or both of  them, as the case may be, to such 2[Indian ] Christian s 
into a language  which he understands;  
or the Marriage Registrar shall otherwise ascertain whether the2[Indian ] Christian s is cognizant of the 
purport and effect of the  said notice and certificate.  
58. Indian Christians to be made to understand declarations. —When  any 2[Indian ] Christian s is 
married under the provisions of this Part,  the person solemnizing the marriage shall ascertain whether 
such 2[Indian ] Christian s understands the English language, and, if he does  not, the person solemnizing 
the marriage shall, at the time of the  solemnization, translate, or cause to be translated, to such  2[India n] 
Christian s, into a language which he understands, the  declarations made at such marriage in accordance 
with the provisions  of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886 , s. 30 , for “Secretary to the L. G.”. 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Native”.  15 
 59. Registration of marriages between Indian Christians .—The registration of marriages between 
1[Indian ] Christians under this Part  shall be made in conformity with the rules laid down in section  37                              
(so far as they are applicable),  and not otherwise.  
PART VI2 
MARRIAGE OF 1[INDIAN ] CHRISTIANS  
60. On what conditions marriages of 1[Indian ] Christians may be  certified. —Every marriage 
between 1[Indian ] Christians applying for a  certificate, shall, without the preliminary notice required 
under Part  III, be certified under this Part, if the following conditions be  fulfilled, and not otherwise: — 
(1) the age of the man intending to be  married 3[shall not be under 4[twenty -one years] ], and the 
age of the woman intending to be married 5[shall not be under 6[eighteen years]];  
(2) neither of the persons intending to be married shall have a wife or husband still living;  
(3) in the presence of a person licensed under section 9, and of at least two credible witnesses 
other than such person, e ach of the  parties shall say to the other — 
“I call upon these persons here present to witness that. 1, A. B., in the presence of Almighty 
God, and in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, do take thee, C. D ., to be my lawful wedded wife 
[or husband] ” or words to the like effect:  
7*    *    *    *   * 
61. Grant of certificate .—When, in respect to any marriage solemnized  under this Part, the 
conditions prescribed in section 60  have been fulfilled, the person licensed as aforesaid, in whose 
presence  the said declaration has been made, shall, on the application  of either of the parties to such 
marriage, and, on the payment  of a fee of four annas, grant a certificate of the marriage.  
The certificate shall be signed by such licensed person, and shall  be received i n any suit touching the 
validity of such marriage  as conclusive proof of its having been performed.  
8[62. Keeping of register -book and deposit of extracts therefrom  with Registrar General .—(1) 
Every person licensed under section 9  shall keep in English, or in the vernacular language in ordinary use  
in the district or State in which the marriage was solemnized, and in such  form as the State Government 
by which he was licensed may from time  to time prescribe, a register -book of all marriages solemnized 
under  this Part in his presence, and shall deposit in the office of the  Registrar General of Births, Deaths 
and Marriages for the territories  under the administration of the said State Government, in such  form and 
at such intervals as that Governme nt may prescribe, true and  duly authenticated extracts from his register -
book of all entries made  therein since the last of those intervals.]  
9*   *   *   *   * 
63. Searches in register  book  and copies of entries .—Every person licensed  under this Act to grant 
certificates of marriage, and keeping  a marriage -register -book under section 62, shall  at all reasonable 
times, allow search to be made in such book, and  shall, on payment of the proper fee, give a copy, 
certified under his  hand, o f any  entry therein.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Act A.O. 1950, for “Native ”. 
2. As to validation of post marriages solemnized under Part VI between persons of whom one only was an Indian Christian, and 
penalty for solemnizing such marriages under Part VI in future, see the  Marriages Validation Act, 1892  (2 of 1892).  
3. Subs. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “shall exceed sixteen years”.  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and the Schedule , for “eighteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
5. Subs. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule , for “shall exceed thirteen years”.  
6. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule , for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978). 
7. Proviso omitted by s. 6 and the Schedule, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
8. Subs.  by Act 2 of 1891, s. 4, for s. 62.  
9. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  16 
 64. Books in which marriages  of Indian Christians under Part I or  Part III are registered .—The 
provisions of sections 62 and 63, as to  the form of the register -book, depositing extracts therefrom,  
allowing searches thereof, and giving copies of the entries therein, shall , mutatis mutandis , apply to the 
books kept under section 37.  
65. Part VI not to apply to Rom an Catholics.  
Saving of certain  marriages .—This Part of this Act, except so much of sections 62 and  63 as are 
referred to in section 64, shall not apply to marriages between  Roman Catholics. But nothing herein 
contained shall invalidate  any marriage celebrated between Roman Catholics under the provisions  of          
1[Part V of Ac t No. 25  of 1864 ], previous to the twenty -third day of February, 1865.  
PART VII 
PENALTIES  
2[66. False oath, declaration, notice or certificate for procuring marriage .—Whoever, for the 
purpose of procuring a marriage or licen se of marriage, intentionally, — 
(a) where an oath or declaration is required by this Act, or by any rule or custom of a Church 
according to th e rites and ceremonies of which  a marriage is intended to be solemnized, such Church 
being the Church of England or of Scotland or of Rome, makes a  false oath or declaration, or,  
(b) where a notice or certificate is required by this Act, signs a false notice or certificate,  
shall be deemed to have committed the offence punishable under section  193 of the Indian Penal Code     
(45 of 1860) with imprisonment of either description  for a term which may extend to three years and, at 
the discretion  of the Court, with fine.]  
67. Forbidding, by false personation issue of certificate by Marriage  Registrar .—Whoever 
forbids the issue, by  a Marriage Registrar , of a certificate, by falsely representing himself to be a person  
whose consent to the marriage is required by law, knowing or believing  such representation  to be false, or 
not having reason to believe it to be true , shall be deemed g uilty of the offence described in section 205  of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
3[68. Solemnizing  marriage without due authority. —Whoever, not  being authorized by section 5 of 
this Act to solemnize marriages,  solemnizes or professes to solemnize, in the absence of a Marriage  
Registrar of the district in which the ceremony takes place, a  marriage between persons one or both of 
whom is or are a Christian  or Christians, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to  ten 
years, or (in lieu of a s entence of imprisonment for seven years  or upwards) with transportation for a term 
of not less than seven  years, and not exceeding ten years,  
4*    *    *    *    *  
and shall also be liable to fine.]  
69. Solemnizing marriage out of proper time, or without witnesses. —Whoever knowingly and 
wilfu lly solemnizes a marriage between  persons, one or both of whom is or are a Christian or Christians, 
at any time other than between the hours of six in the morning and seven  in the evening, or in the absence 
of at least two credible witnesses  other than the person solemnizing the marriage, shall be punished with  
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall  also be liable to fine.  
Saving of marriages solemnized under special licence .—This section does not apply to marriages 
solemnized under special licen ses granted by the Anglican Bishop of the Diocese or by his Commissary,  
nor to marriages performed between the hours of seven in the evening  and six in the morning by a 
Clergyman of the Chur ch of Rome, when he  has received the general or special license in that behalf 
mentioned  in section 10.  
5[Nor does this section apply to marriages solemnized by a  Clergyman of the Church of Scotland 
according to the rules, rites,  ceremonies and customs of  the Church of Scotland.]  
                                                           
1. Act 25 of 1864 had been rep. by Act 5 of 1855, which was rep. by this Act.  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 5, for s. 66.  
3. Subs. by s. 6 , ibid., for s. 68.  
4. Omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
5. Ins. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 7.  17 
 70. Solemnizing without notice or within fourteen days after notice, marriage with minor .—Any 
Minister of Religion licensed to solemnize marriages under this Act, who, without a notice in writing, or, 
when one of the parties to t he marriage is a minor and the required consent of the parents or guardians to 
such marriage has not been obtained, within fourteen days after the receipt by him of notice of such 
marriage, knowingly and wilful ly solemnizes a marriage under Part III, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three  years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
71. Issuing certificate,  or marrying,  without publication of  notice. —A Marriage Registrar under 
this Ac t, who commits any of the  following offences: — 
(1) knowingly and wilfu lly issues any certificate for marriage, or solemnizes any marriage, 
without publishing the notice of such m arriage as directed by this Act ;  
1[(2) marrying after expiry of notice .—after the expiration of two months after the copy of the 
notice has been entered as required by section 40 in respect of any mar riage, solemnizes such 
marriage;]  
(3) solemnizing  marriage with minor within fourteen days, without authority of Court, or 
without se nding copy of n otice .—solemnizes, without an order of a competent Court authorizing 
him to do so, any marriage, when one of the parties is a minor, before the expiration of fourteen days 
after the receipt of the notice of such marriage, or without sending,  by the post or otherwise, a copy of 
such notice to the Senior Marriage Registrar of the district if there be more Marriage Registrars of the 
district than one, and if he himself be not  the Senior Marriage Registrar;  
(4) issuing certificate against authori zed prohibition .—issues any certificate the issue of which 
has been prohibited, as in this Act provided, by any person authorized to prohibit the issue thereof,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  five years, and shall also b e liable to 
fine. 
72. Issuing certificate after expiry of notice, or, in case of  minor, within fourteen days after 
notice, or against authori zed prohibition. —Any Marriag e Registrar knowingly and wilfu lly issuing any  
certificate for marriage after the expiration of 2[two months] after  the notice has been entered by him as 
aforesaid,  
or knowingly and wilfu lly issuin g, without the order of a compe tent Court authorizing him so to do, 
any certificate for marriage,  where o ne of the parties intending marriage is a minor, before the  expiration 
of fourteen days after the entry of such notice, or any  certificate the issue of which has been forbidden as 
aforesaid by any  person authorized in this behalf,  
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 166 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
73. Persons authorized to solemnize  marriage (other than Clergy of Churches of England, 
Scotland or Rome) .—Whoever, being authoriz ed under this Act to solemnize a marriage ,  
and not being a Clergyman of the Church of England solemnizing a  marriage after due publication of 
banns, or under a license from the  Anglican Bishop of the Diocese or a Surrogate duly authorized in that  
behalf,  
or, not being a Clergyman of the Church of Scot land, solemnizing  a marriage according to the rules, 
rites, ceremonies and customs of  that church,  
or, not being a Clergyman of the Church of Rome, solemnizing a  marriage according to the rites, 
rules, ceremonies and customs of that  church,  
issuing certificate, or marryi ng, without publishing notice , or after expiry of certificate ;—
knowingly and wilfu lly issues any  certificate for marriage under this Act, or solemnizes any marriage  
between such persons as aforesaid, without publishing, or causing to  be affixed, the notice of such 
marriage as directed in Part III of  this Act, or after the expiration of two months after the certificate  has 
been issued by him ;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 8( 1), for cl ause (2). 
2. Subs. by s. 8( 2), ibid., for “three months”.  18 
 issuing certificate for, or solemnizing, marriage with minor, within fourteen days after notice .—
or knowingly and wilfully issues any certificate for marriage, or solemnizes a marriage between  such 
persons when one of the persons intending marriage is a minor,  before the expiration of fourteen days 
after the receipt of notice of  such marriage,  or without sending, by the post or otherwise, a copy of  such 
notice to the Marriage Registrar, or, if there be more Marriage  Registrars than one, to the Senior Marr iage 
Registrar of the district;  
issuing certificate authorizedly forbidden :—or knowingly and wilfu lly issues any certificate the 
issue of which has been forbidden,  under this Act, by any person authorized to forbid the issue ;  
solemnizing marriage authorizedly forbidden .—or knowingly and  wilfu lly solemnizes any 
marriage forbidden by any pers on authorized to  forbid the same ; 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  four years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
74. Unlicensed person granting certificate pretending to be  licensed .—Whoever, not being 
licensed to grant a certificate of  marriage under Part VI of this Act, grants such certificate intending  
there by to make it appear that he is  so licensed, shall be punished  with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to five years, and shall  also be liable to fine.  
1[Whoev er, being licensed to grant certificates of marriage under  Part VI of this Act, withou t just 
cause refuses, or wilful ly neglects  or omits, to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by that Part  
shall be punished with fine which may extend to one hundre d rupees .] 
75. Destroying or falsifying register -books .—Whoever, by him self or another, wilfu lly destroys or 
injures any register -book or the  counterfoil certificates thereof, or any part thereof, or any  authenticated 
extract therefrom,  
or falsely makes or counterfeits any part of such register -book  or counterfoil certificates,  
or wilfully inserts any false entry in any such register -book or  counterfoil certificate or authenticated 
extract,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine.  
76. Limitation of prosecutions under Act .—The prosecution for every offence punishable under 
this Act shall be commenced within two  years after the offence is committed.  
PART VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
77. What matters need not be proved in respect of marriage in  accordance with Act. —Whenever 
any marriage has been solemnized in  accordance with the provisions of sections 4 and 5, it shall not be  
void merely on account of any irregularity in respect of any of the  following matters, namely: — 
(1) any statement made in regard to the dwelling of the persons married, or to the consent of any 
person whose consent to su ch marriage is required by law;  
(2) the notice of the marriage;  
(3) the cert ificate or translation thereo f; 
(4) the time and place at which t he marriage has been solemnized ;  
(5) the registration of the marriage.  
78. Corrections of errors .—Every person charged with the duty of  registering any marriage, who 
discovers any error in the form or  substance of any such entry, may within one month next after the  
discovery of such error, in the presence of the persons married, or,  in case of their death or absence, in the 
presence of two other  credible witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin, without  any a lteration 
of the original entry, and shall sign the marginal  entry, and add thereto the date of such correction, and 
such person  shall make the like marginal entry in the certificate thereof.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 9. 19 
 And every entry made under this section shall be attested by th e witnesses in whose presence it was 
made . 
And, in case such certificate has been already sent to the 1[Registrar General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages], such person shall  make and send in like manner a separate certificate of the original  
erroneous entry, and of the marginal correction therein made.  
79. Searches and copies of entries .—Every person solemnizing  a marriage under this Act, and 
hereby  required to register the same,  
and every Marriage Registrar or 1[Registrar General of Births,  Deaths and Marriages] having the 
custody for the time being of any  register of marriages, or of any certificate, or duplicate, or copies  of 
certificate, under this Act,  
shall, on payment of the proper fees, at all reasonable times, allow  searches to be made in such r egister, or 
for such certificate, or  duplicate or copies, and give a copy under his hand of any entry in  the same.  
80. Cert ified copy of entry in marriage -register, etc., to be  evidence .—Every certified copy, 
purporting to be signed by the person  entrusted  under this Act with the custody of any marriage -register 
or certificate, or duplicate, required to be kept or delivered under this  Act, of any entry of a marriage in 
such register or of any such certi ficate or duplicate, shall be received as evidence of t he marriage  
purporting to be so entered, or of the facts purporting to be so  certified therein, without further proof of 
such register or  certificate, or duplicate, or of any entry therein, respectively, or  of such copy.  
2[81. Certificates of certain marriages to be sent to Central  Government .—The Registrar General 
of Births, Deaths and Marriages 3*** shall, at the end of every quarter in each year, select, from the  
certificates of marriages forwarded to 4[him], during such quarter,  the certificates of the marriages of 
which 5[the Government by whom  he was appointed] may desire that evidence shall be transmitted to  
England, and shall send the same certificates, signed by 4[him] to  the 6[Central Government] .] 
82. State Government to prescribe fees. —Fees shall be chargeable  under this Act for — 
receiving and publishing notices of marriages;  
issuing7[certificates for marriage] by Marriage Registrars, and registering marriages by the same;  
entering protests against, or prohibitions of, t he issue of 8[certificates for marriage] by the said 
Registrars;  
searching register -books or certificates, or  duplicates, of copies thereof;  
giving copies of entries in the same under sections 63 and 79.  
The State Government shall fix the amount of such f ees respectively,  
and may from time to time vary or remit them either generally or in  special cases, as to it may seem 
fit. 
83. Power to make rules .—9[(1)] The State Government 10[ may, by  notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules] in regard to the  disposal of the fees mentioned in section 82, the supply of register -
books, and the preparation and submission of returns of marria ges solemnized under this Act.  
11[(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section  shall be laid, as soon as ma y be 
after it is made, before the State  Legislature.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30, for “Secretary to a L.G. ”. 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 1911, s. 2, for s. 81.  
3. The words  and figures “and the officers appointed under section 56” omitted  by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
4. Subs. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule , ibid., for “them  respectively”.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the G. G. in C.”.  
6. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for “Secretary of State for India”.  
7. Subs. by Act 1 of 1903, s. 3 and the Second Schedule,  for “certific ates of marriage”.  
8. Subs. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule , ibid., for “marriage certificates”.  
9. Section 83 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
10. Subs. by s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid., for “may make rules” (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
11. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  20 
 84. [Power to prescribe fees and rules for Indian States .] Omitted  by the A.O . 1950.  
85. Power to declare who shall be District Judge .—The State  Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare who  shall, in any place to which this Act applies, be deemed to be the  
District Judge.  
86. [Powers and functions exercisable as regards Indian States. ] Omitted  by the A. O. 1950.  
87. Saving of Consular marriages .—Nothing in this Act applies to  any marriage performed by any 
Minister, Consul, or Consular Agent  between subjects of the State which he represents and according to 
the laws of such State.  
88. Non-validation of marriages within prohibited degrees .—Nothing  in this Act shall be deemed 
to valid ate any marriage which the  personal law applicable to either of the parties forbids him or her to  
enter into . 
  21 
 SCHEDULE I  
(See sections 12 and 38)  
NOTICE  OF MARRIAGE  
To          a Minister [ or Registrar] of  
I hereby give you notice that a marriage is intended to be had,  within three calendar months from the 
date hereof, between me and the  other party herein named  and described (that is to say) :— 
 
Name s. Condition . Rank or 
profession . Age. Dwelling place . Length of 
residence . Church, chapel or 
place of worship 
in which t he 
marriage is to be 
solemnized . District in which the 
other party resides, 
when the parti es 
dwell in different 
districts . James Smith.  
Window er. 
Carpenter.  
of full age.  
16, Clive Street.  
23 days.  
Free church of Scotland Church,  
Culcutta .  Martha Green.  
Spinster.  
… 
Minor.  
20, Hastings 
Street.  
More than a 
month.   
Witness my hand, this     day of     seventy -two 
(Signed ) JAMES SMITH . 
[The  italics  in this sch edule are to be filled up, as the case may be,  and the blank division thereof is 
only to be filled up when one of the  parties lives in another district.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  22 
 SCHEDULE II  
(See sections 24 and 50)  
CERTIFICATE OF RECEIPT OF NOTICE  
 
I,          do hereby certify that, on the  
day of ,  notice was  duly entered in my Marriage Notice Book of the marriage intended  between 
the parties therein named and described, delivered under the  hand of , one of the parties , (that is to say ):— 
 
Names . Condition . Rank or 
profession . Age. Dwelling 
place . Length of 
residence . Church, 
chapel or 
place of 
worship in 
which the 
marriage is 
to be 
solemnized . District in which 
the other party 
resides, when the 
parties dwell in 
different districts . James Smith. 
Widower . 
Carpenter . 
of full age . 
16, Clive Sreet. 
23 days . 
Free Church of Scotland  Church, 
Calcutta .  Martha Green . 
Spinster . 
……………….  
Minor . 
20, Hastings 
Street . 
More than a 
month .  
and that the declaration1[or oath ], required by section 17 or 41 of the Indian Christian Marriage               
Act, 1872 (15 of 1872), has been duly made by the said ( James Smith ). 
Date of notice entered  
Date of Certificate given  
 
Witness my hand, this  The issue of this certificate has not been prohibited by any person 
authorized to forbid the issue thereof.  
 
day of  seventy -two. 
(Signed ) 
This certificate will be void, unless the marriage is solemnized on or before the   day of  
[The italics  in the Schedule are to be filled up, as the case may be, and the blank division thereof is 
only to be filled up when one of the pa rties lives in another distr ict]. 
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. b y Act 1 of 1903, s. 3, and the Second Schedule.  23 
 SCHEDULE III  
1[(See sections 28 and 31)]  
FORM OF  REGISTER OF MARRIAGES  
Quarterly Returns  
 of  
MARRIAGES  
FOR  
Calcutta . 
The Archdeaconry of   Madras.  
Bombay.  
 
I,     ,Registrar of the Archdeaconry of  Calcutta , 
         Madras ,  
         Bomb ay, 
do hereby certify that the annexed are correct copies of the  originals and Official Quarterly Returns of 
Marriage within the  Archdeaconry  
Calcutta,  
of   Madras,  as made and transmitted to me for the quarter  
  Bomba y,  
commencing  the     day of      ending the day 
of in the year of Our Lord  
[Signature of Registrar.]  
Calcutta.  
    Registrar of the Archdeaconry of    Madras.  
           Bombay . 
     Allahabad,  
MARRIAGES  solemnized at   Barrackpore,  
     Bareilly,  
     Calcutta, etc. , etc. 
 
when 
married .  Names of parties .          Year . 
Month . 
Day. 
Christian . 
Surname . 
Age. 
Condition . 
Rank or 
profession . 
Residence at 
the time of 
marriage . 
Father’s name 
and surname . 
By banns or 
license . 
Signatures of 
the parties . 
Signatures  
Of two or more 
witness es present . 
Signature of the 
person solemnizing 
the marriage . 
              
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule , for “(see section 28)”.  24 
 SCHEDULE IV  
(See sections 32 and 5 4) 
MARRIAGE REGISTER BOOK 
Number .   Names of Parties . Age. Condition . Rank or 
profession .. Residence 
at the time 
of 
marriage . Father ’s 
name and 
surname . When married . Christian 
name . Surname . 
  
 1 Day. Month . Year .   
        
  
  
  
  
 James.  
Martha .   
  
  
  
  
 White . 
Duncan .   
  
  
  
  
26 years . 
17 years .   
  
  
  
  
 Widower . 
Spinster .   
  
  
  
  
 Carpenter . 
……..    
  
  
  
  
 Agra… 
Agra…   
  
  
  
  
William 
White.  
John 
Duncan.  
Married in the        
This marriage was solemnized between us  James  
White , 
Martha 
Duncan , in the presence of us  John Smith . 
John Green . 
 
  25 
 CERTIFICATE OF  MARRIAGE  
 
Number . When married . Names of Parties. Age. Condition . Rank or 
profession . Residence at 
the time of 
marriage . Father ’s 
name and 
surname . Christian 
name . Surname . 
 
 
 
 
1 Day. Month . Year .        
   
 
James...  
Martha...   
 
White...  
 
Duncan...   
 
26 years . 
17 years . Widower
... 
Spinster  Carpenter  
……….  Agra......  
Agra......  William 
White  
Jhon 
Duncan  
Married in the        
This marriage was solemnized between us  James White , 
Martha Duncan , in the presence of us  John Smith . 
John Green . 
  26 
 (SCHEDULE V.) 
SCHEDULE V .—[Enactments repealed .] Rep.by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the 
Schedule . 
 
1 
 THE HINDU ADOPTIONS AND MAINTENANCE ACT, 1956  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Application of Act . 
3. Definitions . 
4. Over riding effect of Act . 
 
CHAPTER  II 
ADOPTION  
5. Adoptions to be regulated  by this Chapter . 
6. Requi sites of a valid adoption . 
7. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption . 
8. Capacity of a female Hindu to take in adoption . 
9. Person s capable of giving in adoption . 
10. Persons who may be adopted . 
11. Other conditions for a valid adoption . 
12. Effects of adoption . 
13. Right of adoptive parents to dispose of their properties . 
14. Determination of adoptive mother in certain cases . 
15. Valid adoption not to be cancelled . 
16. Presumption as to registered documents relating to adoptions . 
17. Prohibition of certain payme nts. 
CHAPTER III  
MAINTENANCE  
18. Maintenance of wife . 
19. Maintenance of widowed daughter -in-law. 
20. Maintenance of children and aged parents . 
21. Dependants defined . 
22. Maintenance of dependant s. 
23. Amount of maintenance . 
24. Claimant to maintenance should be a Hindu . 
25. Amount of maintenance may be altered on change of circumstances . 
26. Debts to have priority . 
27. Maintenance when to be a charge . 
28. Effect of transfer of property on right to maintenance . 
29. [Repealed .]. 
30. Savings . 2 
 THE HINDU ADOP TIONS AND MAINTENANCE ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 78 OF 19561 
[21st December , 1956.]  
An Act to amend and codify the law relating to adoptions  and maintenance among Hindus.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as foll ows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .―(1)This Act  may be called the Hindu Adopt ions and Maintenance  
Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2***. 
2. Applic ation of Act .―(1) This Act applies―  
(a) to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva , a Lingayat or a follower of the B rahmo, Prarthana or AryaSamaj,  
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist,  Jaina or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion, unless it is 
proved that any such person  would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or 
usage as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein i f this Act had not been 
passed.  
Explanation .―The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by  religion, as the case 
may be:―  
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhist s, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion;  
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina  or Sikh 
by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged; 3* * *  
4[(bb) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, who has been abandoned both by his father and mother 
or whose parentage is not known and who in either case is brought up as a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina o r 
Sikh; and]  
(c) any person who is a convert or re -convert to th e Hindu, Bu ddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), nothing contained in this Act shall apply 
to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause (25) of article 366 of the 
Constitution unles s the Central Government, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, otherwise directs.  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and  First Schedule.  
This Act has been amended in U.P. Act 57 of 1976.  
This Act shall, from a date to be notified by the administrator, come into force in Pondicherry, subject to the following 
modification:  
In section 2, after sub -section ( 2), insert:―  
“(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry.”  
2. The  words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 45 of 1962 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-11-1962).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1962).  3 
 (3) The expression “Hindu ” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to who m this Act applies by virtue of the 
provis ions contained in this section.  
3. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,― 
(a) the expressions “custom ” and “usage ” signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or family:  
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonab le or opposed to public policy: and 
Provided further that, in the case of a rule applicable only to a family, it has not b een discontinued 
by the family;  
(b) “maintenance ” includes―  
(i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing, residence, education and m edical attendance and 
treatment;  
(ii) in the case of an unmarried daughter, also the reasonable expenses o f and incident to her 
marriage;  
(c) “minor ” means a person who has not completed hi s or her age of eighteen years.  
4.Over riding effect of Act .―Save as otherwise e xpressly provided in this Act,―  
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which  provision is made in this Act;  
(b) any other law in force immediately before th e commencement of this Act shall cease to apply 
to Hindus in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the pr ovisions contained in this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ADOPTION  
5.Adoptions t o be regulated by this Chapter .―(1)No adoption shall be made after the 
commencement  of this Act by or to a Hindu except in accordance with the provisions contained in this 
Chapter, and any adoption made in contravention of the  said provisions shall be void.  
(2) An adoption which is void shall neither create any rights in the adoptive fam ily in favour of any 
person which he or she could not have acquired except by reason of the adoption, nor destroy the rights of 
any person in the family of his or her birth.  
6. Requisites of a valid adoption .―No a doption shall be valid unless — 
(i) the person adopting has the capacity, and also the right, to take in adoption;  
(ii) the person giving in adop tion has the capacity to do so;  
(iii) the person adopted is capable of being taken in adoption; and  
(iv) the adoption is made in compliance with the other conditions mentioned in this Chapter.  
7.Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption .―Any male Hindu who is of sound mind and is 
not a minor has the capacity to take s on or a daughter in adoption:  
Provided that, if he has a wife living, he shall  not adopt except with the consent of his wife unless the 
wife has completely and finally renounced the word or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a 
court of competent juri sdiction to be of unsound mind.  4 
 Explanation .―If a person has more than  one wife living at the time of adoption, the consent of all the 
wives is necessary unless the consent of any one of them is unnecessary for any of the reasons spec ified 
in the preceding proviso.  
1[8.Capacity of a fe male Hindu to take in adoption .―Any fema le Hindu who is of sound mind and 
is not a minor has the capacity to take a son or daughter in adoption:  
Provided that, if she has a husband living, she shall not adopt a son or daughter except with the 
consent of her husband unless the husband has complet ely and finally renounced the world or has ceased 
to be a Hindu or has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.]  
9.Persons capable of giving in adoption .―(1)No person except the father or mother or the guardian 
of a child s hall have the capacity  to give the child in adoption.  
2[(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the father or the mother, if alive, shall have equal 
right to give a son or daughter in adoption:  
Provided that such right shall not be exercised by either of them save with the consent of the other 
unless one of them has completely and finally renounced the world or has ceased to be a Hindu or has 
been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.]  
3*   *   *   *   * 
4[(4) Where  both the father a nd mother are dead or have com pletely and finally renounced the world 
or have abandoned the child or have been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound 
mind or where the parentage of the child is not known, the guard ian of the child may give the child in 
adoption with the previous permission of the court to any person i ncluding the guardian himself.]  
(5) Before granting permission to a guardian under sub -section ( 4), the court shall be satisfied that the 
adoption will  be for the welfare of the child, due consideration being for this purpose given to the wishes 
of the child having regard to the age and understanding of the child and that the applicant f or permission 
has not received o r agreed to receive and that no per son has made or given or agreed to make or give to 
the applicant any payment or reward in considera tion of the adoption except such as the court may 
sanction.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section―  
(i) the expressions “father ” and “mother ” do not include an adoptive father  and an adoptive 
mother; 5* * *  
6[(ia) “guardian ” means a person having the care of the person of a child or of both his pe rson and 
property and includes―  
(a) a guardian appointed by the will of th e child's father or mother, and  
(b) a guardian appoint ed or declared by a court; and]  
(ii) “court”  means the city civil court or a district court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the child to  be adopted ordinarily resides.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2010, s. 3, for section 8 (w.e.f. 31 -8-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 31 -8-2010).  
3. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -8-2010).  
4. Subs.by Act 45 of 1962, s. 3, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 29 -11-1962).  
5. The word “and” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -11-1962).  
6. Ins. by s. 3, ibid.(w.e.f. 29 -11-1962).  5 
 10. Persons who may be adopted .―No person shall be capable of being taken in adoption unless the 
following con ditions are fulfilled, namely:―  
(i) he or she is a Hindu;  
(ii) he or sh e has not already been adopted;  
(iii) he or she has not been married, unless there is a custom or usage applic able to the parties 
which permits persons who are m arried being taken in adoption;  
(iv) he or she has not completed the age of fifteen years, unless there is a custom or usage 
applicable to the parties which permits persons who have completed the age of fifteen  years being 
taken in adoption.  
11.Other c onditions for a valid adoption .―In every adoption, the following con ditions must be 
complied with:―  
(i) if the adoption is of a son, the adoptive father or mother by whom the adoption is made must 
not have a  Hindu son son’s son or son ’s son ’s son (whether by legitimate blood relationship or by 
adoption)  living at the time of adoption;  
(ii) if the adoption is of a daughter, the adoptive father or mother by whom the ad option is made 
must not have a Hindu daughte r or son ’s daughter (whether by legitimate blood relationship or by 
adoption) living at the time of adoption;  
(iii) if the adoption is by a male and the person to be adopted is a female, the adop tive father is at 
least twenty -one years olde r than the person to be adopted;  
(iv) if the adoption is by a female and the person to be adopted is a male, the adoptive mother is at 
least twenty -one years olde r than the person to be adopted;  
(v) the same child may not be adopted simulta neously by two or more pers ons; 
(vi) the child to be adopted must be actually given and taken in adoption by the parents or 
guardian concerned or under their authority with intent to transfer the child  from the family of its 
birth 1[or in the case of an abandoned child or a child wh ose parentage is not known, from the place 
or family where it has been brought up]  to the family of its adoption:  
Provided that the performance of dattahomam  shall not be essential to  the validity of an adoption.  
12.Effects of adoption .―An adopted child sh all be deemed to be the child of his or her adoptive 
father or mother for all purposes with effect from the date of the adoption and from such date all the ties 
of the child in the family of his or her birth shall be deemed to be severed and replaced by th ose created 
by the a doption in the adoptive family:  
Provided that―  
(a) the child cannot marry any person whom he or she could not have married if he or she had 
continued in the family of his or her birth;  
(b) any property which vested in the adopted child before the adoption shall continue to vest in 
such person subject to the obligations, if any, attaching to the ownership of such property, including 
the obligation to maintain relatives in  the family of his or her birth;  
(c) the adopted child shall not div est any person of any estate which vested in him or her before 
the adoption.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1962, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -11-1962).  6 
 13. Right of adoptive parents to dispose of their properties .―Subject to any agreement to the 
contrary, an adoption does not deprive the adoptive father or mother of the power to  dispose of his or her 
property by transfer inter vivos  or by will.  
14. Determination of a doptive mother in certain cases .―(1)Where aHindu who has a wife living 
adopts a child, she shall be deemed to bethe adopti ve mother.  
(2) Where an adoption has been made with the consent of more than one wife, the seniormost in 
marriage among them shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother and the others to be step -mothers.  
(3) Where a widower or a bachelor adopts a child, any wife whom he subsequently marries shall be 
deemed to be the step -mother of the adopted child.  
(4) Where a window or an unmarried woman adopts a child, any husband whom she marries 
subsequently shall be deemed to be the step -father of the adopted child.  
15. Valid adoption not to be cancelled .―No adoption which has been validly made can be 
cancelled by the adoptive father or mother or any other person, nor can the adopted child renounce his or 
her status as such and return to the family of his or her birth.  
16. Pres umption as to registered documents relating to adop tion.―Whenever any document 
registered under any law for the time being in force is produced before any court purporting to record an 
adoption made and is signed by the person giving and the person taking the child in adoption, the court 
shall presume that the adoption has been made in compliance with the provisions of this Act unless  and 
until it is disproved.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 16 of Act 78 of 1956 .—In the Hindu Adaptation  and Maintenance Act, 1956, 
section 16 shall be re -numbered as sub -section (1) thereof, and after sub -section (1) as so re -numbered the 
following sub -section shall be inserted namely: -- 
“(2) In case any adoption made on or after the first day of January, 1 977 no Court in Uttar Pradesh 
shall accept any evidence in proof of the giving and taking of the child in adoption, except a document 
recording an adoption, made and signed by the person giving and the person taking the child in adoption, 
and registered un der any law for the time being in force;  
Provided that secondary evidence of such document shall be admissible in the circumstances and the 
manner laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).”.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 35]  
17. Prohibition of certain payments .―(1)No person shall receive or agree to receive any payment 
or other reward in consideration of the adoption of any person, and no person shall make or give or agree 
to make or give to any other person any payment or reward the receipt of which  is prohibited by this 
section.  
(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six mont hs, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) No prosecution under this section shal l be instituted without the previous sanction of the State 
Government or an officer authorised by the S tate Government in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
MAINTENANCE  
18. Maintenance of wife .―(1)Subject to the provisions of this section, a Hindu wife, whether 
married before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained by he r husband 
during her life time.  
(2) A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from her husband without forfei ting her claim to 
maintenance,―  7 
 (a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without reasonable cause and 
without her consent or against her wish , or of wilfully neglecting her;  
(b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in her mind that i t 
will be harmful or inju rious to live with her husband;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(d) if he has any other wife living;  
(e) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is living or habitually  resides with 
a concubine else where;  
(f) if he has ceased  to be a Hindu by c onversion to another religion;  
(g) if there is any other cause ju stifying her living separately . 
(3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and maintenance from her husband if she 
is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to anot her religion.  
19. Maintena nce of widowed daughter -in-law.―(1) A Hindu wife, whether married before or after 
the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained after the death of her husband by h er 
father -in-law: 
Provided and  to the extent that she is unable to maintain herself out of her own earnings or other 
property or, where she has no property of her own, i s unable to obtain maintenance―  
(a) from the estate of her husb and or her father or mother, or  
(b) from her son or daughter , if any, or his or her estate.  
(2) Any obligation under sub -section ( 1) shall not be enforceable if the father -in-law has not the 
means to do so from any coparcenary property in his possession out of which the daughter -in- law has not 
obtained any  share, and any such obligation shall cease on the rem arriage of the daughter -in-law. 
20. Maintenanc e of children and aged parents .―(1)Subject to the provisions of this section a 
Hindu is  bound, during his or her life -time, to maintain his or her legitimat e or illegitimate children and 
his or her aged or infirm parents.  
(2) A legitimate or illegitimate child may claim maintenance from his or her father or mother so long 
as the child i s a minor.  
(3) The obligation of a person to maintain his or her aged or infirm parent or a daughter who is 
unmarried extends in so far as the parent or the unmarried daughter, as the case may be, is unable to 
maintain himself or herself out of his or her own earnings or other property.  
Explanation .―In this section “parent “includes a childless step -mother.  
21. Dependants defined .―For the purposes of this Chapter “dependant s” mean the follow ing 
relatives of the deceased:―  
(i) his or  her father;  
(ii) his or her mother;  
(iii) his widow, so  long as she does not re -marry;  
(iv) his o r her son or the son of his pre deceased son or the son of a pre deceased son o f his  
pre-deceased son, so long as he is a minor: provided and to the extent that he is unable to obtain 
maintenance, in the case of a grandson from his father ’s or mother ’s estate, and in the case of a  
great -grandson, from the estate of his father or mother or fat her’s father or father ’s mother;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 6 of 2019, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019).  8 
 (v) his or her unmarried daughter, or the unmarried daughter of his p redeceased son or the 
unmarried daughter of a predeceased son of his pre deceased son, so long as she remains 
unmarried:provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance, in the case of a grand -
daughter from her father ’s or mother ’s estate and i n the case of a great -grand -daughter from the estate 
of her father or mother or fat her's father or father ’s mother;  
(vi) his widowed daughter: provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain mainten ance― 
(a) from the estate of her husband ; or 
(b) from her son or daught er if any, or his or her estate; or  
(c) from her father -in-law or his father or the estate of either of them;  
(vii) any widow of his son or of a son of his pre deceased son, so long as she does not re -marry: 
provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance from her husband ’s estate, or from 
her son or daughte r, if any, or his or her estate ; or in the case of a grandson ’s widow, also from her 
father -in-law’s estate ; 
(viii) his or her minor illegitimate son,  so long as he remains a minor;  
(ix) his or her illegitimate daughter, so  long as she remains unmarried.  
22. Maintenance of dependa nts.―(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the heirs of a 
deceased Hindu are bound to maintain the dependant s of the deceased out of the estate inher ited by them 
from the deceased.  
(2) Where a dependant  has not obtained, by testamentary or intestate succession, any share in the 
estate of a Hindu dying after the commencement of this Act, the dependant  shall be entitle d, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to maintenance from those who take the estate.  
(3) The liability of each of the persons who takes the estate shall be in proportion to the value of the 
share or part of the estate taken by him or her.  
(4) Notwithst anding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), no person who is 
himself or herself a dependant  shall be liable to contribute to the maintenance of others, if he or she has 
obtained a share or part the value of which is, or would, if the l iability to contribute were enforced, 
become less than what would be awarded to him or her by way of maintenance under this Act.  
23. Amount of maintenanc e.―(1)  It shall be in the discretion of the court to determine whether 
any, and if so what, maintenance shall be awarded under the provisions of this Act, and in doing so the 
court shall have due regard to the considerations set out in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case 
may be,  so far as they are applicable.  
(2) In determining the am ount of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to a wife, children or aged on 
infirm parents under th is Act, regard shall be had to―  
(a) the position and status of the p arties;  
(b) the re asonable wants of the claimant;  
(c) if the claimant is living separately,  whether the cl aimant is justified in doing so;  
(d) the value of the claimant ’s property and any income derived from such property, or from the 
claimant's own earni ngs or from any other source;  
(e) the number of persons entitled  to maintenance under this Act.  
(3) In determining the amount of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to a dependent  under th is Act, 
regard shall be had to―  
(a) the net value of the estate of the deceased after providi ng for the payment of his debts;  9 
 (b) the provision, if any, made under a will of the deceas ed in respect of the dependant ; 
(c) the degree o f relationship between the two;  
(d) the re asonable wants of the dependant ; 
(e) the past relations between the dependant  and the deceased;  
(f) the value of the property of the dependant  and any income derived from such property; or from 
his or her ea rnings or from any other source;  
(g) the number of dependant s entitled to maintenance under this Act.  
24. Claimant to  maintenance should be a Hind u.―No person shall be entitled to claim 
maintenance under this Chapter if he or she has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion.  
25. Amount of maintenance may be alte red on change of circumstances .―The amount of 
maintenance, whether fixed by  a decree of court or by agreement, either before or after the 
commencement of this Act, may be altered subsequently if there is a material change in the circumstan ces 
justifying such alteration.  
26. Debts to have priority .―Subject to the provisions contai ned in section 27 debts of every 
description contracted or payable by the deceased shall have priority over the claims of his dependant s for 
maintenance under this Act.  
27. Maintenance when to be a charge .―A dependant ’s claim for maintenance under this Act shall 
not be a charge on the estate of the deceased or any portion thereof, unless one has been created by the 
will of the deceased, by a decree of court, by agreement between the dependant  and the owner of the 
estate or portion, or otherwise.  
28. Effect of transfer of pr operty on right to maintenance .―Where a dependant  has a right to 
receive maintenance out of an estate and such estate or a ny part thereof is transferred, the right to receive 
maintenance may be enforce d against the transferee if the transferee has notice of the right, or if the 
transfer is gratuitous ; but not against the transferee for consideration and without notice of the right.  
CHAPTER IV  
REPEALS AND SAVINGS  
29. [Repeals .]―Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960  (58 of 1960 ), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f. 26-11-1960 ). 
30. Savings .―Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any adoption made before the 
commencement of this Act, and the validity and effect of any su ch adoption shall be determined as if this 
Act had not been passed.  
1 
 THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Application of Act . 
3. Definitions.  
4. Overriding effect of Act . 
HINDU MARRIAGES  
5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage.  
6. [Omitted .]. 
7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage.  
8. Registration of Hindu marriages.  
RESTITUTION  OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION  
9. Restitution of conjugal right.  
10. Judicial separation . 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE  
11. Void marriages.  
12. Voidable marriages.  
13. Divorce.  
13A. Alternate relief in divorce proceedings.  
13B. Divorce by mutual consent.  
14. No petition for divorce to be presented within one year of marriage.  
15. Divorced persons when may marry again.  
16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages.  
17. Punishment of bigamy.  
18. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for a Hindu marriage . 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE  
19. Court to which petition shall be presented.  
20. Contents and verification of petitions.  
21. Application of Act 5 of 1908.  
21A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases.  
21B. Special provision relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act.  
21C. Documentary evidence.  
22. Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or published.  
23. Decree in proceedings.  
23A. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings . 
24. Maintenance pendente lite  and expenses of proceedings.  
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.  
26. Custody of children.  
27. Disposal of property.  
28. Appeals from decrees and orders.  
 28A. Enforcement of decrees and orders.  2 
 SAVINGS AND REPEALS  
SECTIONS  
29. Savings . 
30. [Repealed .]. 
  3 
 THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT,  1955  
ACT NO. 25 OF 19551 
[18th May, 1955 .] 
An act to amend and codify the law relating to marriage among Hindus.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***, and applies also to Hindus domiciled in the territories  to 
which this Act extends who are outside the said territories.  
2. Application of Act .—(1) This Act applies — 
(a) to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat  or a follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj,  
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina  or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or  Jew by religion, unless it is proved that any such person would not have been 
governed by the Hindu law or by   any custom or usage as part of that law in respect of any of the 
matters  dealt with herein if this Act had not been passed.  
Explanation. —The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be: — 
(a) any child, legitim ate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion;  
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh 
by religion and  who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged; and   
(c) any person who is a convert or re -convert to the Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), nothing contained in this Act  shall apply 
to the members of  any Scheduled tribe within the meaning of clause ( 25) of article 366 of the Constitution 
unless the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise directs.  
(3) The expression “Hindu ” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions contained in this section.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) the expressions “custom ” and “usage ” signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed  for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or famil y: 
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and  
Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not been discontinued 
by the family;  
(b) “district court ” means, in any area for which there is a city civil court, that court, and i n any 
other area the principal civil court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil court which 
                                                           
1. The Act  has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I and to 
Pondicherry (w.e.f 1 -10-1963) with modifications by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule I.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  4 
 may be  specified by the State Government, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, as having 
jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this Act;  
(c) “full blood ” and “half blood ”—two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood 
when they are descended  from a common ances tor by the same wife and by half blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestor but by different wives ; 
(d) “uterine  blood ”—two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they 
are descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands;   
Explanation .—In clauses ( c) and ( d), “ancestor ” includes the father and “ancestress ” the mother;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) (i) “sapinda  relationship ” with reference to any person extends as far as the third generation 
(inclusive) in the line  of ascent through the mother, and the fifth (inclusive) in the line of ascent 
through the father, the line being  traced upwards in each case from the person conc erned, who is to 
be counted as the first generation;   
(ii) two persons are said to be “sapindas ” of each other if one is a lineal ascendant of the 
other within the limits of  sapinda  relationship, or if they have a common lineal ascendant who is 
within the  limits of sapinda  relationship  with reference to each of them;  
(g) “degrees of prohibited relationship ”-two persons are said to be within the “degrees of 
prohibited relationship ”— 
(i) if one is a lineal ascendant of the other; or  
(ii) if one was the wife  or husband of a lineal ascendant or descendant of the other; or  
(iii) if one was the wife of the brother or of the father ’s or mother ’s brother or of the 
grandfather ’s or grandmother ’s brother of the other; or   
(iv) if the two are brother and sister, uncl e and niece, aunt and nephew, or children of brother 
and sister or of two brothers or of two sisters;  
Explanation. —For the purposes of clauses ( f) and (g), relationship includes — 
(i) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood;   
(ii) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate;   
(iii) relationship by adoption as well as by blood;  
and all terms of relationship in those clauses shall be construed accordingly.  
4. Overriding effect of Act .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, — 
(a) any text rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which provision is made in this Act;  
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have 
effect in so far as it is  inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act.  
HINDU MARRIAGES  
5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage .—A marriage may be so lemnized between any two Hindus, if 
the following conditions are fulfilled, namely :— 
(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;  
1[(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party — 
(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 2, for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  5 
 (b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such 
a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or  
(c) has been subject to recurre nt attacks of insanity  1***;] 
(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of  2[twenty -one years] and the bride, the age 
of 3[eighteen years] at the time of the marriage;  
(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the custo m or usage 
governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two;  
(v) the parties are not sapindas  of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them 
permits of a marriage between the two;  
4*                               *                             *                            *                         *                                * 
6. [Guardianship in marriage .]—Omitted  by the Child Marriage Restraint  (Amendment ) Act, 1978,  
(2 of 1978), s. 6 and Schedule  (w.e.f . 1-10-1978).  
7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage .—(1) A Hindu marriage may be solemnized in accordance 
with the customary rites and ceremonies of either party thereto.  
(2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Saptapadi  (that is, the taking of seven step s by the 
bridegroom and the bride jointly before the sacred fire), the marriage becomes complete and binding 
when the seventh step is taken.  
8. Registration of Hindu marriages .—(1) For the purpose of facilitating the proof of Hindu 
marriages, the State Government may make rules providing that the parties to any such marriage may 
have the particulars relating to their marriage entered in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed in a Hindu Marriage Register kept for the purpose.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State Government may, if it is of 
opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, provide that the entering of the particulars referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) shall be compulsory in the State or  in any part thereof, whether in all cases or in such 
cases as may be specified, and where any such direction has been issued, any person contravening any 
rule made in this behalf shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty -five rupees.  
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid before the State Legislature, as soon as may be, 
after they are made.  
(4) The Hindu Marriage Register shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection, and shall be 
admissible as evidence of the statements therein contained and certified extracts therefrom shall, on 
application, be given by the Registrar on payment to him of the prescribed fee.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the validity of any  Hindu marriage shall in no 
way be affec ted by the omission to make the entry.   
RESTITUTION  OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION  
9. Restitution of conjugal right .—5** * When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable 
excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the district 
court, for restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made 
in such petition and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be gran ted, may decree 
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.  
6[Explanation .—Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal 
from the society, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn from 
the society.]  
7*                              *                         *                           *                             *                               *  
                                                           
1. The words “or epilepsy” omitted by Act 39 of 1999, s . 2 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule for “elighteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
3. Subs. by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid., for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
4. Clause ( vi) omitted by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-10-1978).  
5. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by Act 68 of 197 6, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
6. Ins. by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
7. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  6 
 10. Judicial separation .—1[(1) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnised before or  after the 
commencement of this Act, may present a petition praying for a decree for judicial separation on any of 
the grounds specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 13, and in the case of a wife also on any of the grounds 
specified in sub -section ( 2) thereof, as grounds on which a petition for divorce might have been 
presented.]  
(2) Where a decree for judicial separation has been passed, it shall no longer be obligatory for the 
petitioner to cohabit with the respondent, but the court may, on the applic ation by petition of either party 
and on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, rescind the decree if it 
considers it just and reasonable to do so.  
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE  
11. Void marriages .—Any marriage solemnised a fter the commencement of this Act shall be null 
and void and may, on a petition presented by either party thereto  2[against the other party], be so declared 
by a decree of nullity if it contravenes any one of the conditions specified in clauses ( i), (iv) and (v) of 
section 5.  
12. Voidable marriages .—(1) Any marriage solemnised, whether before or after the commencement 
of this Act, shall be voidable and may be annulled by a decree of nullity on any of the following grounds, 
namely: — 
3[(a) that the marriage has not been consummated owing to the impo tence of the respondent; or]  
(b) that the marriage is in contravention of the condition specified in clause ( ii) of section 5; or  
(c) that the consent of the petitioner, or where the consent of the guardian in marriage of the 
petitioner  4[was required under section 5 as it stood immediately before the commencement of the 
Child Marriag e Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1978 (2 of 1978)], the consent of such guardian was 
obtained by force  5[or by fraud as to the nature of the ceremony or as to any material fact or 
circumstance s concerning the respondent]; or  
(d) that the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some person other than the 
petitioner.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-section ( 1), no petition for annulling a marriage — 
(a) on the ground specified in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be entertained if — 
(i) the petition is presented more than one year after the force had ceased to operate or, as the 
case may be, the  fraud had been discovered; or  
(ii) the petitioner has, with his or her full consent, lived with the other party to the marriage as 
husband or wife after the force had ceased to operate or, as the case may be, the fraud had been 
discovered;  
(b) on the grou nd specified in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be entertained unless the court is 
satisfied— 
(i) that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage ignorant of the facts alleged;  
(ii) that proceedings have been instituted in the case of a marriage solemnised before the 
commencement of this Act within one year of such commencement and in the case of marriages 
solemnised after such commencement within one year from the date of the marriage; and  
(iii) that marital intercourse with the consent of the pe titioner has not taken place since the 
discovery by the petitioner of the existence of  6[the said ground].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule, for “i s required under section 5” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 6,  for “or fraud” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the grounds for a decree” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  7 
 13. Divorce .—(1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, 
may, on a petition presented by either the husband or  the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce on the 
ground that the other party — 
1[(i) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any 
person other than his or her spouse; or  
(ia) has, after the solemnization of th e marriage, treated the petitioner with cruelty; or  
(ib) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition; or]  
(ii) has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another relig ion; or  
2[(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or intermittently 
from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be 
expected to live with the respondent.  
Explanation. —In this clause, — 
(a) the expression “mental disorder ” means mental illness, arrested or incomplete 
development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability of mind and 
includes schizophrenia;  
(b) the expression “psychopathic disorder ” means a persistent disorder or disability of mind 
(whether or not including sub —normality of intelligence) which results in abnormally aggressive 
or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the other party, and whether or not it requires or 
is susce ptible to medical treatment; or]  
3*    *  *   *  * 
(v) has  4* * * been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form; or  
(vi) has renounced the world by entering any religious order; or  
(vii) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons 
who would naturally have heard of it, had that party been alive;  5*** 
6*                                  *                            *                      *                         *                           * 
7[Explanation. —In this sub -section, the expression “desertion ” means the desertion of the 
petitioner by the other party to the marriage without reasonable cause and without the consent or 
against the wish of such party, and includes the wilful neglect of the  petitioner by the other party to the 
marriage, and its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.]   
8[(1A) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after the commencement of this Act, 
may also present a petition for the dissolution of the marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground — 
(i) that there has been no resumption of cohabitation as between the parties to the marriage for a 
period of  9[one year] or upwards after the passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding 
to which they were parties; or  
(ii) that there has been no restitution o f conjugal rights as between the parties to the marriage for a 
period of  9[one year] or upwards after the passing of a decree for restitution of con jugal rights in a 
proceeding to which they were parties.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Clause ( iv) omitted by Act 6 of 2019, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019).  
4. Certain words omitted by s. 7 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. The word “or” omitted by Act 44 of 1964, s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1964).  
6. Clause s (viii) and ( ix) omitted by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 20-12-1964).  
7. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
8. Ins. by  Act 44 of 1964,  s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1964).  
9. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for “two year s” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  8 
 (2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her marriage by a decree of divorce on 
the ground, — 
(i) in the case of any marriage solemnized before the commencement of this Act, that  the husband 
had married again before such commencement or that any other wife of the husband married before 
such commencement was alive at the time of the solemnization of the marriage of the petitioner:  
Provided that in either case the other wife is aliv e at the time of the presentation of the petition; or  
(ii) that the husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or  
1[bestiality; or]  
2[(iii) that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1 956                 
(78 of 1956), or in a proceeding under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973               
(2 of 1974) (or under the corresponding section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898                 
(5 of 1898), a decree or order, as the case may be, has been passed against the husband awarding 
maintenance to the wife notwithstanding that she was living apart and that since the passing of such 
decree or order, cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed for one y ear or upwards;  
(iv) that her marriage (whether consummated or not) was solemnized before she attained the age 
of fifteen years and she has repudiated the marriage after attaining that age but before attaining the 
age of eighteen years.  
Explanation. —This c lause applies whether the marriage was solemnized before or after the 
commencement  of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976). ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 13 of Act  XXV  of 1955.—In sub -section (1) of section 13 of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955, -- 
(a) after clause (i) the following new cause shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have 
been inserted;  
“(i-a) has persistently or repeatedly treated the petitioner with such cruelty as to cause a 
reasonable apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that it will be harmful or injurious for the 
petitioner to live with the other party ;or”, and  
(b) for clause (vii), the following clause shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to have 
been substituted;  
“(viii) has not resumed cohabitation after the passing of a decree for judicial separation against 
that party and — 
(a) a period of two years has elapsed since the passing of such decree,  or 
(b) the case is one of exceptional hardship to the petitioner or of  exceptional depravity on the part 
of the other party; or”.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XI II of 1962, s. 2]  
3[13A. Alternate relief in divorce proceedings .—In any proceeding under this Act, on a petition for 
dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce, exce pt in so far as the petition is founded on the grounds 
mentioned in clauses ( ii), (vi) and ( vii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13, the court may, if it considers it just 
so to do having regard to the circumstances of the case, pass instead a decree for judicial separation.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for “bestiality” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-2976).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  9 
 13B. Divorce by mutual consent .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act a petition for dissolution 
of marriage by a decree of divorce may be presented to the district court by both the parties to a marriage 
together, whether such m arriage was solemnized before or after the commencement  of the Marriage Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), on the ground that they have been living separately for a period of 
one year or more, that they have not been able to live together and that th ey have mutually agreed that the 
marriage should be dissolved.  
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of the 
presentation of the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than eighteen months after  the said 
date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the court shall, on being satisfied, after hearing the 
parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized and that the 
averments in the petition are true, pass a decree of divorce declaring the marriage to be dissolved with 
effect from the date of the decree.]  
14. No petition for divorce to be prese nted within one year of marriage. —(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, it shall not be competent for any court to entertain any petition for 
dissolution of a marriage by a decree of divorce,  1[unless at the date of the presentation of the petition one 
year has elapsed] since the date of the marriage:  
Provided that the court may, upon applica tion made to it in accordance with such rules as may be 
made by the High Court in that behalf, allow a petition to be presented  4[before one year has elapsed] 
since the date of the marriage on the ground that the case is one of exceptional hardship to the petitioner 
or of exceptional depravity on the part of the respondent, but if it appears to the court at the hearing of the 
petition that the petitioner obtained leave to present the petition by any misrepresentation or concealment 
of the nature of the case , the court may, if it pronounces a decree, do so subject to the condition that the 
decree shall not have effect until after the  2[expiry of one year] from the date of the marriage or may 
dismiss the petition without prejudice to any petition which may be brought after  3[expiration of the said 
one year] upon the same or substantially the same facts as those alleged in support of the petition            
so dismissed.  
(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to present a petition for divorce before 
the 4[expiration of one year] from the date of the marriage, the court shall have regard to the interests of 
any children of the marriage and to the question whether there is a reasonable probability of a 
reconciliation between the parties b efore the expiration of the  5[said one year].  
15. Divorced persons when may marry again .—When a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of 
divorce and either there is no right of appeal against the decree or, if there is such a right of appeal, the 
time for appealing has expired without an appeal having been presented, or an appeal has been presented 
but has been dismissed, it shall be lawful for either party to the marriage to marry again.  
6*                             *                        *                              *                                *                             *  
7[16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages .—(1) Notwithstanding that a marriage 
is null and void under section 11, any child of such marriage who would have been legitimate if the 
marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether such child is born before or after the commencement  
of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), and whether or not a decree of nullity is 
granted in respect of t hat marriage under this Act and whether or not the marriage is held to be void 
otherwise than on a petition under this Act.  
(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in respect of a voidable marriage under section 12, any child 
begotten or conceived before the decree is made, who would have been the legitimate child of the parties 
to the marriage if at the date of the decree it had been dissolved instead of being annulled, shall be 
deemed to be their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “expiry of three ye ars” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “expir ation of the said one year ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “expiry of three years” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “said three  years” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
6. Proviso omitted by s.10 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
7. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for s. 16 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  10 
 (3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be construed as conferring upon any 
child of a marriage which is null and void or which is annulled by a decree of nullity under section 12, 
any rights in or to the property of any person, oth er than the parents, in any case where, but for the 
passing of this Act, such child would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such rights by 
reason of his not being the legitimate child of his parents.]  
17. Punishment of bigamy .—Any marriage  between two Hindus solemnized after the 
commencement of this Act is void if at the date of such marriage either party had a husband or wife 
living; and the provisions of sections 494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), shall 
apply accordi ngly.  
18. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for a Hindu marriage .—Every 
person who procures a marriage of himself or herself to be solemnized under this Act in contravention of 
the conditions specified in clauses ( iii), (iv), 1[and ( v)] of section 5 shall be punishable — 
 2[(a) in the case of contravention of the condition specified in clause  (iii) of section 5, with 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.]  
(b) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause ( iv) or clause ( v) of                  
section 5, with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both;  3* * * 
4*                      *                             *                            *                              *                                   *  
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE  
5[19. Court to which petition shall be presented .—Every petition under this Act shall be presented 
to the District Court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil jurisdiction: — 
(i) the marriage was solemnized, or  
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition, resides, or  
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together, or  
6[(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, wher she is residing on the date of presentation of the 
petition; or ] 
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the 
respondent is at that time, residing outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been 
heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons who would naturally have 
heard of him if he were alive. ] 
20. Contents and v erification of petitions .—(1) Every petition presented under this Act shall state 
as distinctly as the nature of the case permits the facts on which the claim to relief is founded  7[and, 
except in a petition under section 11, shall also state] that there i s no collusion between the petitioner and 
the other party to the marriage.  
(2) The statements contained in every petition under this Act shall be verified by the petitioner or 
some other competent person in the manner required by law for the verification o f plaints, and may, at the 
hearing, be referred to as evidence.  
21. Application of Act 5 of 1908 .—Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and to such 
rules as the High Court may make in this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regulated, as far 
as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule, for “( v) and ( vi)” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2007, s. 20 (w.e.f. 30 -10-2007).  
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 2 of 1 978, s. 6 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
4. Clause ( c) omitted by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 12, for s. 19 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
6. Ins. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 4 (w.e.f. 23 -12-2003).  
7. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 13, for “and shall also State”  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  11 
 1[21A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases .—(1) Where — 
(a) a petition under this Act has been presented to a district court having jurisdiction by a party to 
a marriage praying for  a decree for judicial separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce 
under section 13, and  
(b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter by the other party to the marriage 
praying for a decree for judicial separation under sect ion 10 or for a decree of divorce under section 
13 on any ground, whether in the same district court or in a different district court, in the same State 
or in a different State,  
the petitions shall be dealt with as specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) In a case where sub -section ( 1) applies, — 
(a) if the petitions are presented to the same district court, both the petitions shall be tried and 
heard together by that district court;  
(b) if the petitions are presented to different district courts, the petition presented later shall be 
transferred to the district court in which the earlier petition was presented and both the petitions shall 
be heard and disposed of together by the distric t court in which the earlier petition was presented.  
(3) In a case where clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) applies, the court or the Government, as the case may 
be, competent under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), to transfer any suit or proceedi ng 
from the district court in which the later petition has been presented to the district court in which the 
earlier petition is pending, shall exercise its powers to transfer such later petition as if it had been 
empowered so to do under the said Code.  
21B. Special provision relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act .—(1) The trial of a 
petition under this Act shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of justice in respect of 
the trial, be continued from day to day unti l its conclusion unless the court finds the adjournment of the 
trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded.  
(2) Every petition under this Act shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of service of notice of the petition on the 
respondent.  
(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as possible, and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the hearing within three months from the date of service of notice of appeal on the 
respondent.  
21C. Documentary evidence .—Notwithstanding anything in any enactment to the contrary, no 
document shall be inadmissible in evidence in any proceeding at the trial of a petition under this Act on 
the ground that it is not duly stamped or registered.]  
2[22. Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or published .—(1) Every proceeding 
under this Act shall be conducted in camera and it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish 
any mat ter in relation to any such proceeding except a judgment of the High Court or of the Supreme 
Court printed or published with the previous permission of the court.  
(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of the provisions contained  in           
sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.]  
23. Decree in proceedings .—(1) In any proceeding under this Act, whether defended or not, if the 
court is satisfied that  
(a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists and the petitioner  3[except in cases where the 
relief is sought by him on the ground specified in sub -clause ( a), sub -clause ( b) or sub -clause ( c) of 
clause ( ii) of section 5] is not in any way taking advantage of his or her own wron g or disability for 
the purpose of such relief, and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 14, (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for s. 22 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  12 
 (b) where the ground of the petition is the ground specified  1* * *  in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 13, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or connived at or condoned the 
act or acts complained of, or where the ground of the petition is cruelty the petitioner has not in any 
manner condoned the cruelty, and  
2[(bb) when a divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such consent has not been 
obtained by force, fraud or undue influence, and]  
(c) 2[the petition (not being a petition presented under section 11)] is not presented or prosecuted 
in collusion with the respondent, and  
(d) there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in instituting the proceeding, and  
(e) there is no other legal ground why relief should not be granted, then, and in such a case, but 
not otherwise, the court shall decree such relief accordingly.  
(2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under this Act, it shall be the duty of the court in th e first 
instance, in every case where it is possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the 
case, to make every endeavour to bring about reconciliation  between the parties:  
3[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall  apply to any proceeding wherein relief is 
sought on any of the grounds specified in clause ( ii), clause ( iii), clause ( iv), clause ( v), clause ( vi) or 
clause ( vii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13.]  
2[(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such reconciliation, the court may, if the 
parties so desire or if the court thinks it just and proper so to do, adjourn the proceedings for a reasonable 
period not exceeding fifteen days and refer the matter to any person named by the parties in thi s behalf or 
to any person nominated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, with directions to report to the 
court as to whether reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the court shall in disposing of the 
proceeding have due regard to  the report.  
(4) In every case where a marriage is dissolved by a decree of divorce, the court passing the decree 
shall give a copy thereof free of cost to each of the parties.]  
4[23A. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings .—In any proceedi ng for divorce or 
judicial separation or restitution of conjugal rights, the respondent may not only oppose the relief sought 
on the ground of petitioner ’s adultery, cruelty or desertion, but also make a counter -claim for any relief 
under this Act on that ground; and if the petitioner ’s adultery, cruelty or desertion is proved, the court 
may give to the respondent any relief under this Act to which he or she would have been entitled if he or 
she had presented a petition seeking such relief on that ground.]  
24. Maintenance pendente lite  and expenses of proceedings .—Where in any proceeding under this 
Act it appears to the court that either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, has no independent 
income sufficient for her or his support and the necessary  expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the 
application of the wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the 
proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner ’s own 
income an d the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.  
5[Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and such monthly 
sum during the proceeding, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of 
service of notice on the wife or the husband, as the case may be.]  
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance .—(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this Act 
may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent thereto, o n application made to it for the 
purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall  6* * * pay to 
                                                           
1. The words, bracket, letter of  figure  “in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10 or” omitted by  Act 68 of 1976,  s. 16, 
(w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “ the petition” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Added by  s. 16 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4.  Ins by s. 1 7, ibid.  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 8 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
6.  The words “while the applicant remains unmarried” omitted by Act 68 of 1976, s. 1 8 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  13 
 the applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum 
for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as, having regard to the respondent ’s own income and 
other property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant  1[the conduct of the parties and other 
circumstances of the case], it may seem to the court to be just, and any such payment may be secured, if 
necessary, by a charge on the immovable property of the respondent.  
(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party at any time after 
it has made an order under s ub-section ( 1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind 
any such order in such manner as the court may deem just.  
(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been made under this section 
has re -married  or, if such party is the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the 
husband, that he has had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock,  2[it may at the instance of 
the other party vary, modify or rescind any such order in suc h manner as the court may deem just].  
26. Custody of children .—In any proceeding under this Act, the court may, from time to time, pass 
such interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper with respect to 
the custody, m aintenance and education of minor children, consistently with their wishes, wherever 
possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by petition for the purpose, make from time to time, 
all such orders and provisions with respect to the custody, main tenance and education of such children as 
might have been made by such decree or interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree 
were still pending, and the court may also from time to time revoke, suspend or vary any such orders and 
provis ions previously made:  
3[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor children, 
pending the proceeding for obtaining such decree, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty 
days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.]  
27. Disposal of property .—In any proceeding under this Act, the court may make such provisions in 
the decree as it deems just and proper with respect to any property presented, at or about the time of 
marriage, which m ay belong jointly to both the husband and the wife.  
4[28. Appeals from decrees and orders .—(1) All decrees made by the court in any proceeding under 
this Act shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be appealable as decrees of the court made in  
the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and every such appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals 
ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.  
(2) Orders made by the court in any pro ceeding under this Act under section 25 or section 26 shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be appealable if they are not interim orders, and every such 
appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in 
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.  
(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject of costs only.  
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a  5[period of ninety days ] from the date 
of the decree or order.  
28A. Enforcement of decrees and orders .—All decrees and orders made by the court in any 
proceeding under this Act shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders of the court made 
in the exercise of its  original civil jurisdiction for the time being in forced. ] 
SAVINGS AND REPEALS  
29. Savings .—(1) A marriage solemnized between Hindus before the commencement of this Act, 
which is otherwise valid, shall not be deemed to be invalid or eve r to have been invalid by reason only of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 18, for certain words. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “it shall rescind the order” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 9 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001) . 
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 5, for “period of thirty days” (w.e.f. 23-12-2003).  14 
 the fact that the parties thereto belonged to the same gotra or pravara  or belonged to different religions, 
castes or sub -divisions of the same caste.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any r ight recognised by custom or 
conferred by any special enactment to obtain the dissolution of a Hindu marriage, whether solemnized 
before or after the commencement of this Act.  
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any proceeding under any law for the time being in 
force for declaring any marriage to be null and void  or for annulling or dissolving any marriage or for 
judicial separation pending at the commencement of this Act, and any such proceeding may be continued 
and determined as if this Act ha d not been passed.  
(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions contained in the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954, (43 of 1954) with respect to marriages between Hindus solemnized under that Act, 
whether before or after the commence ment of this Act.  
30. [Repeals ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f. 26-12-1960) . 
1 THE KAZIS ACT, 1880  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
2. Power to appoint Kazis for any local area.  
3. Naib Kazis . 
4. Nothing in Act to confer judicial or administrative powers; or to render the presence of Kazi 
necessary; or to prevent any one acting as Kazi . 2 THE KAZIS ACT, 1880  
ACT NO.12 OF 18801 
[9th July , 1880 .] 
An Act for the appointment of persons to the Office of Kazi ’. 
WHEREAS  by the preamble to Act No.  11 of 18642 (An Act to repeal the law relating to t he offices of 
Hindu and Muhamma dan Law officers and to the offices of Kazi ’-ul-Kuzaat and of Kazi ’, and to abolish 
the former offices ) it was (among other things) declared that it was declared that it   was inexpedient that 
the appointment of the Kazi -ul-Kuzaat, or of City, Town or Pargana  Kazi ’s should be made by the 
Government, and by the same Act the enactments relating to the appointment by the Government of the 
said officers were repealed; and whereas by the usage of the Muhammad an community in some parts of  
3[India ] the presence of Kazi ’s appointed by the Government is required at the celebration of marriages 
and the performance of certain other rites and ceremonies, and it is therefore expedient that the 
Government should again be empowered to appoint persons to the office of Kazi; It is he reby enacted as 
follows:— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Kazi ’s Act, 1880;  
4*   *   *   *   * 
Local extent .—It extends, in the first instance, only to the territories administered by the Governor of 
Fort Saint George in Council.  5[But the Government of any other State ] may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, extend it to the whole or any part of the territories under its 
administration .6 
 2. Power to appoint Kazi ’s for any local area .—Wherever it appears to the State Government that 
any considerable number of the Muhammadans resident in any local area desire that one or more Ka ’zi’s 
should be appointed for such local area, the State Government may, if it thinks fit, after consulting the  
principal Muhammadan residents of such local area, select one or more fit persons and appoint him or 
them to be Kazi ’s for such local area.  
If any question arises whether any person has been rightly appointed Kazi ’ under this section, the 
decision thereof by the State Government shall be conclusive.  
The State Government may, if it thinks fit, suspend or remove any Kazi ’ appointed under this section 
who is guilty of any misconduct in the execution of his office, or w ho is for a continuous period of six 
months absent from the local area for which he is appointed, or leaves such local area for the purpose of 
residing elsewhere, or is declared an insolvent, or desires to be discharged from the office,  or who refuses 
or becomes in the opinion of the State Government unfit, or personally incapable, to discharge the duties 
of the office.  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 2 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -10-1970) 
and to the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. Rep.by Act 8 of 1868.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Provinces”.  
4. The words “and it shall come into force at once” omitted by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3and II Schedule.  
5. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or “But the Government of any other Part A State or the Government of a                 
Part C State”.  
6. The Act has been extended to certain places in the Bombay Presidency, West Bengal, the U.P., the Punjab, the C.P. and 
Assam.  3 3. Naib Kazi ’s.—Any Kazi ’ appointed under this Act may appoint one or more persons as his Naib 
or Naibs to act in his place in all or any of the matters appertaining to his office throughout the whole or 
in any portion of the local area for which he is appointed, and may suspend o r remove any naib so 
appointed.  
When any Kazi ’ is suspended or removed under section 2, his naib or naibs (if any) shall be deemed 
to be suspended or removed, as the case may be.  
4. Nothing in Act to confer judicial or administrative powers; or to render the presence of 
Kazi’s necessary; or to prevent any one acting as Kazi ’s.—Nothing herein contained, and no 
appointment m ade hereunder, shall be deemed — 
(a) to confer any judicial or administrative powers on any Kazi ’ or Naib Kazi ’ appointed 
hereunder; or  
(b) to render the presence of a Kazi ’ or Naib Kazi ’ necessary at the celebration of any marriage or 
the perf ormance of any rite or ceremony ; or 
(c) to prev ent any person discharging any of the functions of a Kazi ’. 
 
__________  
1 
 THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Application of Act.  
3. Definitions and interpretation.  
4. Overriding effect of Act.  
 
CHAPTER II  
INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  
General  
5. Act not to apply to certain properties.  
6. Devolution of interest in coparcenary property.  
7. Devolution of interest in the property of a tarwad, tavazhi, kutumba, kavaru orillom.  
8. General rules of succession in the case of males.  
9. Order of succession among heirs in the Schedule.  
10. Distribution of property among heirs in class I of the Schedule.  
11. Distribution of property among heirs in class II of the Schedule.  
12. Order of succession among agnates and congnates.  
13. Computation of degrees.  
14. Property of a female Hindu to be her absolute property.  
15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus.  
16. Order of succession and manner of distribution among heirs of a female Hindu.  
17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumakkattayam  and aliyasantana  laws.  
 
General  provisions relating to succession  
18. Full blood preferred to half blood . 
19. Mode of succession of two or more heirs . 
20. Right of child in womb . 
21. Presumption in cases of simultaneous deaths . 
22. Preferential right to acquire property in certain cases . 
23. [Omitted .]. 
24. [Omitt ed.]. 
25. Murderer disqualified . 
26. Convert ’s descendants disqualified . 
27. Succession when heir disqualified . 
28. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify . 
Escheat  
29. Failure of heirs .  2 
 CHAPTER III  
TESTAMENTARY  SUCCESSION  
SECTIONS  
30. Testamentary succession . 
CHAPTER IV  
REPEALS  
31. [Repealed .]. 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  3 
 THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 30 OF 19561 
[17th June , 1956.]  
An Act to amend and codify the law relating to int estate succession among Hindus.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of  India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .―(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***. 
2. Application of Act .―(1)This Act applies ― 
(a) to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the B rahmo, Prarthana or Arya  Samaj,  
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion, unless it is 
proved that any such person would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or 
usage as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein i f this  Act had not been 
passed.  
Explanation .―The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be: ― 
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion;  
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh 
by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged;  
(c) any person who is a convert or reconvert to the Hindu, Bu ddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), nothing contained in this Act shall apply 
to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause ( 25) of article 366 of the 
Constitution unless the Central Government, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, otherwise directs.  
(3) The expression “Hindu ” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions  contained in this section.  
3. De finitions and interpretation .―(1)In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “agnate ”―one person is said to be an “agnate ” of another if the two are related by blood or 
adoption wholly through males;  
(b) “aliyasantana law ” means the system of law applicable to persons who, if this Act had not 
been passed, would have been governed by the Madras Aliyasantana A ct, 1949, (Madras Act 9 of 
1949 ) or by the customary aliyasantana law with respect to the matters for whic h provision is made in 
this Act;  
                                                           
1. The Act hasbeen extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and First Schedule and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7  of 1963, s. 3 
and First Schedule.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
 4 
 (c) “cognate ”―one person is said to be a “cognate” of another if the two are related by blood or 
adoptio n but not wholly through males;  
(d) the expressions “custom ” and “usage ” signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or family:  
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy: and  
Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not b een discontinued 
by the family;  
(e) full blood “half blood ” and “uterine blood ”― 
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are descended 
from a common ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they are descended from a 
common ances tor but by different wives;  
(ii)two persons are said to be relate d to each other by uterine blood when they are descended 
from a common ancest ress but by different husbands;  
Explanation .―In this clause “ancestor ” includes the father and “ancestress ” the mother ; 
(f) “heir” means any person, male or female, who is entitled to succeed to the property  of an 
intestate under this Act;  
(g) “intestate ”―a person is deemed to die intestate in respect of property of which he or she has 
not made a testa mentary dispo sition capable of t aking effect;  
(h) “marumakkattayam law” means the system of law appli cable to persons ― 
(a)who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed by the Madras 
Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act 22 of 1933 ); the Travancore Nayar Act (2 of 1100K ); 
the Travancore Ezhava Act (3 of 1100K ); the Travancore Nanjinad  Vellala Act (6 of 1101K ); the 
Travancore Kshatriya Act (7 of 1108K ); the Travancore Krishnanvaka  Marumak  kathayee  (Act 7 
of 1115K ); the Cochin Marumak  kathayam Act (33 of 1113K ); or the Coch in Nayar Act (29 of 
1113K ); with respect to the matters for whic h provision is made in this Act; or  
(b) who belong to any community, the members of which are largely domiciled in the State of 
Travancore Cochin or Madras 1[as it existed immediately before the 1st November, 1956], and 
who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed with respect to the matters for 
which provision is made in this Act by any system of inheritance in which descent is  traced 
through the female line;  
but does no t include the aliyasantana  law; 
(i) “nambudri law ” means the system of law applicable to persons who, if this Act had not been 
passed, would have been governed by the Madras Nambudri Act, 1932 Madras Act (21 of 1933 ); the 
Cochin Nambudri Act (17 of 111K ); or t he Travancore Malayala Brahmin Act (3 of 1106K ); with 
respect to the matters for which  provision is made in this Act;  
(j) “related ” means  related by legitimate kinship:  
Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to be related to their mother and to one 
another, and their legitimate descendants shall be deemed to be rel ated to them and to one another ; 
and any word expressing relationship or denoting a relative shall be const rued accordingly.  
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, w ords importing the masculine gender shall n ot 
be taken to include females.  
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956.  5 
 4. Over riding effect of Act .―(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this  Act,― 
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in  force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for whic h provision is made in this Act;  
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to apply 
to Hindus in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the pr ovisions contained in this Act.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER II  
INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  
General  
5. Act not to apply to certain properties .―This Act shall not apply to ― 
(i) any property succession to which is regulated by t he Indian Succession Act, 1925 ( 39 of 
1925 ), by reason of the provisions contained in section 21 of the Special M arriage Act, 1954 (43 of 
1954);  
(ii) any estate which descends to a single heir by the terms of any covenant or agreement entere d 
into by the Ruler of any Indian State with the Government of India or by the terms of any enactment 
passed befo re the commencement of this Act;  
(iii) the Valiamma  Thampuran  Kovilagam  Estate and the Palace Fund administered by the Palace 
Administration Board by reason of the powers conferred by Proclamation (IX of 1124) dated 29th 
June, 1949, promulg ated by the Maharaja of Cochin.  
2[6. Devolut ion of interest in coparcenary property .―(1) On and from the commencement of the 
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , in a Joint Hindu family governed by the 
Mitakshara law, the daughter of a coparcener shall, ― 
(a) by birth become a coparcener in her own r ight the same manner as the  son; 
(b) have the same rights in the coparcener y property as she would have had if she had been a son;  
(c) be subject to the same liabilities in respect of the said coparcener y property as that of a son,  
and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to include a reference to a daughter 
of a coparcener:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect or invalidate any disposition or 
alienation including any partition or testamentary disposition of property which had taken place before the 
20th day of December, 2004.  
(2) Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of sub -section ( 1) shall be held 
by her  with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or any other la w for the time being in force , as property capable of being disposed of 
by her by testamentary disposition.  
(3) Where a Hindu dies after the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  
(39 of 2005) , his i nterest in the property of a Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, shall 
devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by 
survivorship, and the coparcener y property shall be deemed to have been div ided as if a partition had 
taken place and, ― 
(a) the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a son;  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 39 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  
2. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for section 6 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  6 
 (b) the share of the pre -deceased son or a pre -deceased daughter, as they would have got had they 
been alive at the time of partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child of such pre -deceased son or 
of such pre -deceased daughter; and  
(c) the share of the pre -deceased child of a pre -deceased son or of a pre -deceased daughter, as 
such child would have got had he or she been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the 
child of such pre -deceased child of the pre -deceased so n or a pre -deceased da ughter, as the case may 
be. 
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener 
shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to him if a partition of the 
property had taken place  immediately before his death, irrespective of whether he was entitled to claim 
partition or not.  
(4) After the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , no court 
shall recogni se any right to proceed against a son, grandson or great -grandson for the recovery of any debt 
due from h is father, grandfather or great -grandfather solely on the ground of the pious obligation under 
the Hindu law, of such son, grandson or great -grandson to discharge any such debt:  
Provided that in the case of any debt contracted before the commencement of the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , nothing contained in  this sub -section shall affect ― 
(a) the right of any creditor to proceed again st the son, grandson or great -grandson, as the case 
may be; or  
(b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of, any such debt, and any such right or 
alienation shall be enforceable under the rule of pious obligation in the same manner and to the same 
extent as it would have been enforceable as if the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  
(39 of 2005) had not been enacted.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of clause ( a), the expression “son”, “grandson ” or “great -grandson ” 
shall be deemed to refer to the son, grandson or great -grandson, as the case may be, who was born or 
adopted prior to the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) . 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a partition, which has been effected before the 
20th day of December,  2004  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section “partition ” means any partition made by execution of 
a deed of partition duly registered under the Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908)  or partition effected by a 
decree of a court.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka .― 
Insertion of new sections in Central Act 30 of 1956. ―In the  Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (Central 
Act 30 of 1956) after section 6, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:―  
“6A. Equal rights to daughter in co -parcenary property. ―Notwithstanding anything cont ained in 
section 6 of this Act, ― 
(a) in a joint Hindu family governed by Mitakshara  law, the daughter of a co -parcener shall by 
birth become a co -parcener in her own right in the same manner as the son and have the same rights 
in the co -parcenary property as she would have had if she had been a son inclusive of the right to 
claim by surv ivorship and shall be subject to the same liabilities and disabilities in respect thereto as 
the son;  
(b) at a partition in such Joint Hindu Family the co -parcenary property shall be so divided as to 
allot to a daughter the same share as is allotable to a son: 
Provided that the share which a predeceased son or a predeceased daughter would have got at the 
partition if he or she had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child 
of such predeceased son or of such predeceased  daughter:  7 
 Provided further that the share allotable to the predeceased child of the predeceased son or of a 
predeceased daughter, if such child had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the 
child of such predeceased child of the pr edeceased son or of such predeceased daughter, as the case 
may be;  
(c) any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of the provisions of clause 
(a) shall be held by her with the incidents of co -parcenary ownership and shall be regarded, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, as 
property capable of being disposed of by her by will or other testamentary disposition;  
(d) nothing in clause (b) shall apply to a daughter married prior to or to a partition which had 
been effected before the commencement of Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1990.  
6B. Interest to de volve by survivorship on death .―When a female Hindu dies after the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendme nt) Act, 1990, having at the time of her 
death an interest in a Mitakshara co -parcenary property, her interest in the property shall devolve by 
survivorship upon the surviving members of the co -parcenary and not in accordance with this Act:  
Provided that i f the deceased had left any child or child of a pre -deceased child, the interest of the 
deceased in the Mitakshara co -parcenary property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, 
as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship.  
Explanation .―(1) For the purposes of this section the interest of female Hindu Mitakshara  co-
parcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to her if a partition 
of the property had taken place immediately before her death, irrespective of whether she was entitled to 
claim partition or not.  
(2) Nothing c ontained in the proviso to this section shall be construed as enabling a person who, 
before the death of the deceased had separated himself or herself from the co -parcenary, or any of his or 
her heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the interest referred to therein.  
6C. Preferential right to acq uire property in certain cases .―(1) Where, after the commencement 
of Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1990 an interest in any immovable property of an 
intestate or in any business carried on by him or her, whether solely or in conjunction with others 
devolves under sections 6A or 6B upon two or more heirs and any one of such heirs proposes to transfer 
his or her interest in the property or business, the other heirs shall have a preferential right to acq uire the 
interest proposed to be transferred.  
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred under 
sub-section (1) shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the court, on 
application, being made to it in this behalf, and if any person proposing to acquire the interest is not 
willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all costs of or 
incidental to the application.  
(3) If ther e are two or more heirs proposing to acquire any interest under, this section, that heir who 
offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred.  
Explanation .―In this section 'Court' means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immoveable property is situate or the business is carried on, and includes any other court which the State 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette specify in this behalf.]  
[Vide Karnataka  Act 2 3 of 1994 , sec. 2].  
7. Devolution of interest in the property of a tarwad, tav azhi, kutumba, kavaru  or 
illom .―(1)When a Hindu to whom the marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law would have applied if this 
Act had not been passed dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death 
an interest in the property of a tarwad , tavazhi  or illom , as the case may be, his or her interest in the 
property shall  devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not 
according to the marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law. 
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu in the property of a 
tarwad, tavazhi  or illom  shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the tarwad, tavazhi  or illom , as 8 
 the case may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita  had been 
made immediately before his or her death among all t he members of the tarwad, tavazhi or illom , as the 
case may be, then living, whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the 
marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law applicable to him or her, and such share shall be deemed to have been 
allotted to him or her absolutely.  
(2) When a Hindu to whom the aliyasantana  law would have applied if this Act had not been passed 
dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death an undivided interest in 
the property of a kutumba  or kavaru , as the case may be, his or her interest in the property shall devolve 
by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not acc ording to the 
aliyasantana  law. 
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu in the property of a 
kutumba  or kavaru  shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the kutumba  or kavaru , as the case 
may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita  had been made 
immediately before his or her death among all the members of the kutumba  or kavaru , as the case may be, 
then living, whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the aliyasantana  law, and 
such share shall be deemed to have been all otted to him or her absolutely.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), when a sthanamdar  dies after the 
commencement of this Act, the sthanam  property held by him shall devolve upon the members of the 
family to which the sthanamdar  belonged and the heirs of the sthanamdar  as if the sthanam  property had 
been divided per capita immediately before the death of the sthanamdar  among himself and all the 
members of his family then living,, and the shares falling to the members of h is family and the heirs of the 
sthanamdar  shall be held by t hem as their separate property.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the family of a sthanamdar  shall include every 
branch of that family, whether divided or undivided, the male memb ers of which would have been 
entitled by any custom or usage to succeed to the position of sthanamdar  if this Ac t had not been passed.  
8. General rules of s uccession in the case of males .―The property of a male Hindu dying intestate 
shall devolve according  to the provisions of this Chapter: ― 
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives speci fied in class I of the Schedule;  
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the heirs, being the relatives specif ied in class 
II of the Schedule;  
(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then u pon the agnates of the deceased ; and  
(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upo n the cognates of the deceased.  
9. Order of successi on among heirs in the Schedule .―Among the heirs specified in the  Schedule, 
those in class I shall take simultaneously and to t he exclusion of all other heirs ; those in the first entry in 
class II shall be preferr ed to those in the second entry ; those in the second entry shall be prefer red to those 
in the third entry ; and so on in succession.  
10. Distribution of property among he irs in class I of the Schedule .―The property of an intestate 
shall be divided among the heirs in class I of the Schedule in accord ance with the following rules: ― 
Rule 1.―The intestate ’s widow, or if there are more widows than one, all the widows together, 
shall take one share.  
Rule 2.―The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of the intestate shall each take one 
share.  
Rule 3.―The heirs in the branch of each pre -deceased son or ea ch pre -deceased daughter of the 
intestate sha ll take between them one share.  
Rule 4 .―The distribution of th e share referred to in Rule 3 — 9 
 (i) among the heirs in the branch of the pre -decease d son shall be so made that his widow (or 
widows together ) and the surviving sons a nd daughters get equal portions ; and the branch of his 
pre-decea sed sons gets the same portion;  
(ii) among the heirs in the branch of the pre -deceased daughter shall be so made that the 
surviving sons an d daughters get equal portio ns. 
11. Distribution of property among hei rs in class II of the Schedule .―The property of an intestate 
shall be divided between the heirs specified in any one entry in class II of the Schedule so that th ey, share 
equally.  
12. Order of succes sion among agna tes and cognates .―The order of succession among agnates or 
cognates, as the case may be, shall be determined in accordance with the rules of preferenc e laid down 
hereunder: ― 
Rule 1.―Of two heirs, the one who has fewer or no degrees of ascent is preferred.  
Rule 2.―Where the number of degrees of ascent is the same or none, that heir is preferred who 
has fewer or no degrees of descent.  
Rule 3.―Where neither heir is entitled to be preferred to the other under Rule 1  or Rule 2  they 
take simultaneously.  
13. Computation of degrees .―(1) For the purposes of determining the order of succession among 
agnates or cognates, relationship shall be reckoned from the intestate to the heir in terms of degrees of 
ascent or degrees of desce nt or both, as the case may be.  
(2) Degrees of ascent and degrees of descent shall be compu ted inclusive of the intestate.  
(3) Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending.  
14.Property of a female Hin du to be her absolute property .―(1)Any property possessed by a 
female Hindu, whether acquired before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full 
owner ther eof and not as a limited owner.  
Explanation .―In this sub -section, “property ” includes both mov able and immovable property 
acquired by a fema le Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears 
of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or 
by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescr iption, or in any other manner whatsoever, and 
also any such property held by her as stridhana  immediately befor e the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any pro perty acquired by way of gift or under 
a will or any other instrument or under a decree or order of a civil court or under an award where the 
terms of the gift, will or other instrument or the decree, order or award prescribe a restrict ed estate in such 
property.  
15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus .―(1) The property of a female Hindu 
dying intestate shall devolve  according to the rules set out in section 16, ― 
(a) firstl y, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) and the husband;  
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;  
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;  
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and  
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in sub -section ( 1),― 
(a) any property inheri ted by a female Hindu from her father or mother shall devolve, in the 
absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) not upon the other heirs referred in sub -section ( 1) in the order specified therein, but upon 
the heirs of the father; and  
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or fro m her father -in-law shall 
devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any  
pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in sub -section ( 1) in the order 
specified therein , but upon the heirs of the husband.  10 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala.— 
Amendment of section 15 .―In the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (Central Act 30 of 1956), in section 
15, after clause (b) of sub -section (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:―  
“(c)” any property inherited by a female Hindu from her pre -deceased son shall devolve, not upon the 
other heirs referred to in sub -section (1) in the order specified t herein, but upon the heirs of the pre -
deceased son from whom she inherited the property.”  
[Vide Kerala Act 17 of 2016 , sec. 2].  
16. Order of succession and manner of distribution  among heirs of a female Hindu .―The order 
of succession among the heirs referred to in section 15 shall be, and the distribution of the intestate ’s 
property among those heirs shall take place according t o the following rules, namely: ― 
Rule 1.―Among the heirs specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 15, those in one entry shall be 
preferred to those in any succeeding entry, and those included in the same e ntry shall take simultaneously.  
Rule 2.―If any son or daughter of the intestate had pre -deceased the intestate leaving his or her own 
children alive at the time of the intestate ’s death, the children of such son or daughter shall take between 
them the share which such son or daughter would have taken if l iving at the intestate ’s death.  
Rule 3.―The devolution of the property of the intestate on the heirs referred to in clauses ( b), (d) and 
(e) of sub -section (1) and in sub-section ( 2) of section 15 shall be in the same order and according to the 
same rules as would have applied if the property had been the father ’s or the mother ’s or the husband ’s as 
the case may be, and such person had died intestate in respect thereof immediate ly after the intestate ’s 
death.  
17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumak kattayam  and atiyasantana  
laws .―The provisions of sections 8, 10, 15 and 23 shall have effect in relation to persons who would 
have been governed by the marumakkattayam  law or aliyasantana  law if this  Act had not been passed as 
if― 
(i) for sub -clauses ( c) and ( d) of section 8, the followi ng had been substituted, namely: ― 
“(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon his relatives, whether 
agnates or cognates. ”; 
(ii) for clauses ( a) to ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 15, the followi ng had been substituted, 
namely :― 
“(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughter s (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) and the mother;  
(b) secondly, upon the father and the husband;  
(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mot her; 
(d) fourthl y, upon the heirs of the father; and  
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husban d.”; 
(iii) clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 15 had been omitted;  
(iv) section 23 had been omitted.  
General pr ovisions relating to succession  
18. Full blood preferred to half blood .―Heirs related to an intestate by full blood shall be preferred 
to heirs related by half blood, if the nature of the relationship is t he same in every other respect.  
19. Mode of s uccession of two or more heirs .―If two or more heirs succeed together to the property 
of an intestate,  they shall take the property, ― 
(a) save a s otherwise expressly provided in this Act, per capita  and not per stirpes ; and 
(b) as tenants -in-commo n and not as joint tenants.  
20. Right of child in womb .―A child who was in the womb at the time of the death of an intestate  
and who is subsequently born alive shall have the same right to inherit to the intestate as if he or she had 
been born before the death of the intestate, and the inheritance shall be deemed to vest in such a case with 
effect from the date  of the death of the intestate.  
21. Presumption i n cases of simultaneous deaths .―Where two persons have died in circumstances 
rendering it uncertain whether either of them, and if so which, survived the other, then, for all purposes 11 
 affecting succession to property, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger 
survived the elder.  
22. Preferential right to acq uire property in certain cases .―(1) Where, after the commencement 
of this Act, an interest in any immova ble property of an intestate, or in any business carried on by him or 
her, whether solely or in conjunction with others, devolves upon two or more heirs specified in class I of 
the Schedule, and any one of such heirs proposes to transfer his or her interes t in the property or business, 
the other heirs shall have a preferential right to acquire the inter est proposed to be transferred.  
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred under 
this section shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the court on 
application being made to it in this behalf, and if any pe rson proposing to acquire the interest is not 
willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all costs of or 
incident to the application.  
(3) If there are two or more heirs specified in class I of the Schedule  proposing to acquire any interest 
under this section, that heir who offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred.  
Explanation .―In this section, “court ” means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immovable property is situate or the business is carried on, and includes any other court which the State 
Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, specify in this behalf.  
23. [Special  provision respecting dwelling -houses. ]―Omitted by  the Hindu Succession (Amendment) 
Act, 2005  (39 of 2005 ), s. 4 (w.e.f. 9-9-2005 ). 
24. [Certain windows re -marry ing may not inherit as windows .]―Omitted by  s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-9-
2005 ). 
25. Murderer disqualified .―A person who commits murder or abets the commission of murder 
shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person murdered, or any other property in 
furtherance of the succession to which he or she committed or abette d the commission of the murder.  
26. Convert’s descendants disqualif ied.―Where, before or after the commencement of this Act, a 
Hindu has ceased or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion, children born to him or her 
after such conversion and their descendants shall be disqualified from inheriting the proper ty of any of 
their Hindu relatives, unless such children or descendants are Hindus at the time when the succession 
opens.  
27. Succession when heir disqualified .―If any person is disqualified from inheriting any property 
under this Act, it shall devolve as if such person  had died before the intestate.  
28. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify .―No person shall be disqualified from succeeding to any 
property on the ground of any disease, defect or deformity, or save as provided in this Act, on any other 
ground whatsoever.  
Escheat  
29. Failure of heirs .―If an intestate has left no heir qualified to succeed to his or her property in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, such property shall devolve on the Government; and the 
Government shall take the property subject to all the obligations and liabilities to which a n heir would 
have been subject.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Tamil Nadu  
In the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal act), after chapter II, the 
following chapter shall be  inserted, namely: -- 
  12 
 "CHAPTER II -A, 
Succession by survivorship.  
29-A. Equal rights to daughter in coparcenary property .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 6 of this Act, -- 
(i) in a Joint Hindu Family governed by Mitakshara  Law, the daughter of a coparcener shall 
by birth become a coparcener in her own right in the same manner as a son and have the same 
rights in the coparcenary property as she would have had if she had been a son, inclusive of the 
right to claim by survivor ship; and shall be subject to the same liabilities and disabilities in 
respect thereto as the son;  
(ii) at a partition in such a Joint Hindu Family the coparcenary property shall be so divided as 
to allot to a daughter the same share as is allotable to a s on: 
Provided that the share which a pre -deceased son or a pre -deceased daughter would have got 
at the partition if he or she had been alive at the time of the partition shall be allotted to the 
surviving child of such pre -deceased son or of such pre -deceas ed daughter:  
Provided further that the share allotable to the pre -deceased child of a predeceased son or of a 
pre-deceased daughter, if such child had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to 
the child of such pre -deceased child of the  predeceased son or of the pre -deceased daughter, as 
the case may be;  
(iii) any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of the provisions of 
clause (i) shall be held by her with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regard ed, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, as 
property capable of being disposed of by her by will or other testamentary disposition;  
(iv) nothing in this Chapter shall apply to a daughter married before the date of the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989;  
(v) nothing in clause (ii) shall apply to a partition which had been effected before the date of 
the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) A ct, 1989.  
29-B. Interest to devolve by survivorship on death .—When a female Hindu dies after the date 
of the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989, having, at the 
time of her death, an interest in a Mitakshara  coparcenary property by virtue of the provisions of 
section 29 -A, her interest in the property shall devolve by survivorship upon the surviving members 
of the coparcenary and not in accordance with this Act:  
Provided that if the deceased had left any chil d or child of a pre -deceased child, the interest of the 
deceased in the Mitakshara coparcenary property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate 
succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship.  
Explanation I. --For the purposes of t his section, the interest of a female Hindu Mitakshara 
coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to her if a 
partition of the property had taken place immediately before her death, irrespective of whether she 
was entitled to claim partition or not.  
Explanation II. --Nothing contained in the proviso to this section shall be construed as enabling a 
person who, before the death of the deceased, had separated himself or herself from the coparcenary 
or any of his or her heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the interest referred to therein.  13 
 29-C. Preferential right to acquire property in certain cases .--(1) Where, after the date of the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989, an interest  in any 
immovable property of an intestate or in any business carried on by him or her, whether solely or in 
conjunction with others, devolves under section 29 -A or section 29 -B upon two or more heirs, and 
any one of such heirs proposes to transfer his or her interest in the property or business, the other 
heirs shall have a preferential right to acquire the interest proposed to be transferred.  
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred 
under this section  shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the 
court on application being made to it in this behalf, and if any person proposing to acquire the interest 
is not willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, su ch person shall be liable to pay all 
costs of, or incidental to, the application.  
(3) If there are two or more heirs proposing to acquire any interest under this section, that heir 
who offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred.  
Explanation. --In this section "court" means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immovable property is situate or the business is carried on  and includes any other court which the 
State Government may, by notification in the Tamil Nadu Gove rnment Gazette, specify in this 
behalf.".]  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1990, s. 2]  
CHAPTER III 
TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION  
30. Testamentary succession .―1*** Any Hindu may dispose of by will or other testamentary 
disposition any property, which is capable of being so 2[disposed of by him  or by her] , in accordance with 
the provisions of t he Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925 ), or any other law for the time being in 
force and applicable to Hindus.  
Explanation .―The interest of a ma le Hindu in a Mitakshara copar cenary property or the interest of a 
member of a tarwad, tavazhi, illom, kutumba  or kavaru  in the property of the tarwad,  tavazhi, illom , 
kutumba  or kavaru  shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force, be deemed to be property capable of being disposed of by him or by her within the 
meaning of this 3[section.]  
4*   *    *    *    *  
CHAPTER  IV 
REPEALS  
31. [Repeals .]―Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960 ), s.2 and the First  
Schedule  (w.e.f.  26-12-1960 ). 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by Act 58 of 196 0, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2005, s. 6, for “disposed of by him” (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule  for “sub -section” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974 ). 
2. Omitted b y Act 78 of 1956, s. 29 (w.e.f. 21 -12-1956 ). 14 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 8)  
HEIRS IN CLASS I AND CLASS  II 
Class I  
Son; daughter; widow ; mother; son of a pre -deceased son;  daughter of a pre -deceased son ; son of a 
pre-deceased daughter ; daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; widow of a pre -deceased son; son of a  
pre-deceased son of a pre -deceased son; daughter of a pre -deceas ed son of a pre -deceased son; widow of 
a pre -deceased son of a pre -deceased son 1[son of a predeceased daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; 
daughter of a pre -deceased daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; daughter of a pre -deceased son of a  
pre-deceased da ughter; daughter of a pre -deceased daughter of a pre -deceased son].  
Class II  
I. Father.  
II. (1) Son ’s daughter ’s son, (2)  son’s daughter ’s dau ghter, (3) brother, (4) sister.  
III. (1) Daughter ’s son ’s son, (2) daughter ’s son ’s daughter, (3) daughter ’s daughter’s  son, (4) 
daughter ’s daughte r’s daughter.  
IV. (1) Brother ’s son, (2) sister ’s son, (3) brother ’s daughter , (4) sister ’s daughter.  
V. Father ’s father ; father ’s mother.  
VI. F ather ’s widow; brother ’s widow.  
VII. Fath er’s brother ; father ’s sister.  
VIII. Mother ’s father; mother ’s mother.  
IX. Moth er’s brother ; mother ’s sister.  
Explanation .―In this Schedule , references to a brother or sister do not include references to a brother 
or sister by uterine blood.  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 39 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  
1 
 THE DISSOLUTION OF MUSLIM MARRIAGES ACT, 1939  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Grounds for decree for dissolution of marriage  
3. Notice to be served on heirs of the husband when th e husband’s whereabouts are not  known . 
4.  Effect of conversion to another faith.  
5. Rights to dower not to be affected.  
6. [Repealed. ]. 
  2 
  
THE DISSOLUTION OF MUSLIM MARRIAGES ACT, 1939  
ACT NO. 8 OF 1939  
            [17th March , 1939.]  
An Act to consolidate and clarify the provisions of Muslim law relating to suits for dissolution of 
marriage by women married under Muslim law and to remove doubts as to the effect of the 
renunciation of Islam by a married Muslim woman on her marriage tie.  
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and clarify the pro visions of Muslim law relating to suits 
for dissolution of marriage by women married under Muslim law and to remove doubts as to the effect of 
the renunciation of Islam by a married Muslim woman on her marriage tie; It is hereby enacted as 
follows: –– 
1. Short title and extent.  –– (1) This Act may be called the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages        
Act, 1939.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1[2***] 3. 
2. Grounds for decree for dissolution of marriage. —A woman married under Muslim law shall be 
entitle to obtain a decree for the dissolution of her marriage on any one or more of the following grounds, 
namely: –– 
(i) that the whereabouts of the husband have not been known for a period of four years;  
(ii) that the husband has neglected or has failed to provide for her mainte nance for a period of two 
years;  
(iii) that the husband has been sentenced to imprisonment for a period of seven years or upwards;  
(iv) that the husband has failed to perform, without re asonable cause, his marital  obligations for a 
period of three years ; 
(v) that the husband was impotent at the time of the marriage and continues to be so;  
(vi) that the husband has been insane for a period of two years or is suffering from 4*** a virulent  
venereal disease;  
(vii) that she, having been given in marriage by her father or other guardian before she attained 
the age of fifteen years, repudiated the marriage before attaining the age of eighteen years :  
       Provided that the marriage has not be en consummated ;  
  
                                                             
1. Subs by Act 48 of 1959, s. 3 and Sch. I, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1960).  
2. The words ―except the State of Jammu and Kashmir‖ omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                                  
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
3. In its application to Pondicherry, in section 1, after sub -section ( 2), the following shall be i nserted — 
―Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of  Pondicherry.‖ — (Vide Act 
26 of 1968).  
The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I.   
4. The words ―lepr osy or‖ omitted by Act 6 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e.f 1 -3-2019).  3 
 (viii) that the husband treats her with cruelty, that is to say, — 
(a) habitually assaults her or makes her life miserable by cruelty of conduct even if 
such conduct does not amount to physical ill -treatment , or 
(b) associates  with women of evil repute or leads an infamous life, or  
(c) attempts to force her to lead an immoral life, or  
(d) disposes of her property of prevents her exercising her legal rights over it, or  
(e) obstructs  her in the observance of her religious profession or practice, or  
(f) if he has more wiv es than one, does not treat her equitably in accordance with the 
injunctions of the Qoran;  
(ix) on any other ground which is recognised as valid for the dissolution  of marriages 
under muslim law :  
Provided that  —  
(a) no decree shall be passed on ground ( iii) until the sentence has become final;  
(b) a decree passed on ground ( i) shall not take effect for a period of six months from the date 
of such decree, and if the  husband appears either in person or through an authorised agent within 
that period and satisfies the Court that he is prepared to perform his conjugal duties, the Court 
shall set aside the said decree; and  
(c) before passing a decree on ground ( v) the Co urt shall, on application by the husband, 
make an order requiring the husband to satisfy the Court within a period of one year from the date 
of such order that he has ceased to be impotent, and if the husband so satisfies the Court within 
such period,  no decree shall be passed on the said ground.  
3. Notice to be served on heirs of the husband when the husband’s whereabouts are not     
known.  — In a suit to which clause ( i) of section 2 applies — 
(a) the names and addresses of the persons who would have been the heirs of the husband under 
Muslim law if he had died on the date of the filing of the plant shall be stated in the plaint,  
(b) notice of the suit shall be served on such persons, and  
(c) such  persons shall have the right to be heard in the suit :  
Provided that paternal uncle and brother of the husband, if any, shall be cited as party even if he 
or they are not heirs.  
4. Effect of conversion to another faith.  —The renunciation of Islam by a mar ried Muslim 
woman or her conversion to a faith other than Islam shall not by itself operate to dissolve her marriage :  
Provided that after such renunciation, or conversion, the woman shall be entitled to obtain a decree 
for the dissolution of her marriage on any of the grounds mentioned in section 2:  
Provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a woman converted to Islam 
from some other faith who re -embraces her former faith.  
5. Rights to dower not to be affected.  — Nothing contai ned in this Act shall affect any right which a 
married woman may have under Muslim law to her dower or any part thereof on the dissolution of her 
marriage.  
6. [Repeal of section  5 of Act  26 of 1937.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending                                       
Act, 1942 (25 of 1942), s. 2 and the First Schedule  .  
  
 
1 
 THE ANAND MARRIAGE ACT, 1909  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Validity of Anand marriages.  
3. Exemption of certain marraiges from Act.  
4. Saving of marriages solemnized according to other ceremonies.  
5. Non-validation of  marriages within prohibited degrees.  
6. Registration of marriages.  
 
  2 
 THE ANAND MARRIAGE ACT, 1909  
ACT NO. 7 OF 19091 
[22nd October, 1909 .] 
An Act to remove doubts as to the validity of the marriage ceremony common among the Sikhs 
called Anand . 
WHEREAS  it expedient to remove any doubts as to the validity of the marriage ceremony common 
among the Sikhs called Anand; it  is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the  Anand Marriage Act, 1909; and.  
(2) Its extends to the whole of India 2***. 
2. Validity of Anand marriages. —All marriages which may be or may have been duly 
solemnized according to the Sikh marriage ceremony called Anand  3[(commonly known as Anand 
Karaj)]  shall be, and shall be deemed to have been with effect from the date Of the solemnization 
or each respectively, good and valid in law.  
3. Exemption of certain marraiges from Act. —Nothing in this Act shall apply to —  
(a) any marriage between persons not professing the Sikh religion, or  
(b) any marriage which has been judically declared to be null and void.  
4. Saving of marriages solemnized according to other ceremonies. —Nothing in this Act shall 
affect the validity of any marriage duly solemnized according to any other marriage ceremony customary 
among the Sikhs.  
5. Non -validation of marriages within prohibi ted degrees. —Nothing in  this Act shall be deemed 
to validate any marriage between persons who are related to each other in any degree of consanguinity or 
effinity which would, according to the customary law of the Sikhs, render a marriage between them 
illegal. 
4[6. Registration of marriages .—(1) For the purposes of facilitation of proof of marriage ceremony 
(commonly known as Anand Karaj) customary among the Sikhs, the State Government shall, without 
prejudice to anything contained in the Hindu  Marriage Act , 1955 (25 of 1955 ) or any other law for the 
time being in force, make rules providing that the parties to any such marriage [whether solemnized 
before or after the commencement of the Anand Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2012], may have the 
particulars relatin g to their marriage entered, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
provided in the said rules, in a Marriage Register kept by such officer of the State Government or of a 
local authority authorised by the State Government, by notification  in the Official Gazette, in this behalf.  
(2) The Marriage Register shall, at all reasonable times, be open for inspection, and shall be 
admissible as evidence of the statements contained therein and certified extracts therefrom shall, on an 
application, b e given by the Registrar to the parties to the marriage on payment of such fees as may be 
provided in the rules.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the validity of any Anand Marriage 
solemnized shall in no way be affected by the omissi on to make an entry in the Marriage Register.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid before the State 
Legislature, as soon as may be, after they are made.  
 
                                                      
1. The Act has extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and first Schedu le                     
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965).  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                            
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019) . 
3. Ins. by Act 29 of  2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  3 
 (5) The parties to the marriage, whose marriage has been regis tered under this Act, shall not be 
required to get their marriage registered under any other law for the time being in force (including State 
Act).]  
 
 
__________  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
PARLIAMENT LIBRARY AND REFERENCE, RESEARCH, DOCUMENTATION  
AND INFORMATION SERVICE (LARRDIS)  
 
MEMBERS’ REFERENCE SERVICE  
 
  REFERENCE NOTE  .  
No. 16/RN/Ref./ July /2015 
 
For the use of Members of Parliament                                                       Not for Publication  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2015  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
The reference material is for personal use of the Members in the discharge of their Parliamentary duties, and is not for 
publication.  This Service is not to be quoted as the source of the information as it is based on the sources indicated at 
the end/in the text.  This  Service does not accept any responsibility for the accuracy or veracity of the information or 
views contained in the note/collection.  
 Bena mi Transactions (Prohibition)  Amendment  Bill, 2015  
Introduction  
 Benami  transactions  is  commonly accepted in India is that 'where a person buys 
property with his own money but in the name of another person or buys property in his 
own name but subsequently transfers it into the name of another person, without any 
intention in either case to benefit such other person. The transaction is called ' benami ' 
and the person in whose name the transaction is effected is called ' benamida r'.  
 While general ly prevalent in the case of immovable properties -land and 
buildings -where registration of the property in the name of the owner can only secure 
his/her legal title, benami  holding is equally common in respect of various kinds of 
movable properties.  For ex ample, Shares of companies  are often purchased or applied 
for and allotted in the names of persons other than the real owner who furnishes the 
consideration. Businesses are  also often carried on through benamis1. 
 Most benamidars  are relations generally husband, wife and children. The 
objective is to have the benefits of bifurcation  of income and  wealth without properties 
going away from the control or area of close relations2. 
  
Impact of Benami Transactions  
 The adverse  impact  of benami transactions  on the country’s economy is large.  It 
bifurcates income earning activities into fragments leading to loss of tax revenue for the 
governmen t which  could have been used for the welfare and development of nation.  
Benami  deals are one of the main reason for proliferation of black money in big way and   
poverty and inequity could not be eliminated unless g eneration of black money   is controlled.   
 In India , where people prefer to inves t their unaccounted wealth in real estate, benami  
transactions  especially  in realty sector  have become major avenues for holding and generation 
of black money . These transactions have  inflated realty  prices, narrowed options for home 
buyers and kept  own house a dream  beyond reach for many .  
                                            
1 Benami Transactions, Origin, Development and Arbitration by K. N. Balasubramanian, 1988, Chapter -I, 
p.4 
2 Govt. Apathy to check Benami Transactions by T. N. Pandey, Charted Secretary, March,2014, p.275  2 
 
 The benami transactions have been rising year after year. To put an end to such 
transactions, a Benami Transactions (prohibition) Act was passed in 1988.  
 The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988  
 It is a small piece of legislation , consisting of 9  sections with only three substantive  
sections — sections 3, 4 and 5 .  Section 2 deals with definitions, where a 'benami  transaction' 
has been defined as "any transaction in which property is transferred to one person for a 
consideration paid or provided b y another person". This definition is defective in the sense that it 
does not consider the situation where a property may not be transferred but acquired initially.   
 Section 3 prohibits benami transactions by enacting that no person shall enter into any 
benami  transaction. This does not prohibit purchase of properties in the names of wives or 
unmarried daughters. However, benami  nature of such acquisitions shall be presumed. Sub -
section (3) of this section provides that whoever enters into any benami  trans action shall be 
punishable with imprisonment upto three years or with fine or with both.   
 Section 4 bars right of recovery of property held benami from the side of the real owner. 
However, exceptions have been provided in cases of Hindu Undivided Family p roperties.  
 Section 5 stipulates that properties held benami  shall be liable to acquisition by such 
authority after following  the prescribed procedure without payment of any amount for 
acquisition.   
 One handicap in administering the Act relates to burden of proof. It is to be discharged 
by the person who alleges benami  and this needs a well -organised machinery to carry out 
proper groundwork and initiate action for acquisition.  The substantive provisions of the Benami  
Act can be invoked only when the benami  nature of deal gets established.  Because of this ,the 
impact of the legislation gets diluted.  
 To remove these infirmities,  a new law was proposed by the UPA Government  in 2011  
to replace the existing  Act3. 
 
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011  
 The Bill  was  introduced in Lok Sabha on 18 August , 2011    which propos ed 
replacing the Benami Transaction (prohibition)  Act, 1988.  
                                            
3 Ibid. 3 
 
 The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011, inter-alia, provides for the 
following, namely: — 
i) it prohibits benami  transactions by any person, except in the case of benami  
transactions entered into in the name of spouse, brother or sister or any lineal 
ascendant or descendant;  
 
ii) it provides that Benami  property arising out of prohibited Benami  transaction is 
liable to confiscation by the Central Government and such property shall vest 
absolutely in the Central Government without paying any compensation;  
 
iii) it prohibits right of the benamidar  to recover property held benami ; 
 
iv) it provides that the Initiating Officer, the Ap proving Authority and the 
Administrator shall be the authorities for the purposes of the Bill;  
 
v) it provides that the Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate Tribunal 
established under the Prevention of Money -Laundering Act, 2002 shall 
respectively be the Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate Tribunal for the 
purposes of the Bill and any person aggrieved by an order of Adjudicating 
Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal;  
 
vi) it provides that any party aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court on any question of law;  
 
vii) it enables the Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the 
High Court, to designate one or more Courts of Session as Special Court or 
Special Courts for the purpose of the Bill;  
 
viii) it provides penalty for entering into prohibited benami  transactions and for 
furnishing any false documents in any proceeding under the Bill;  
 
ix) it provides for transfer of any suit or proceeding in respect of a benami 
transacti on pending in any Court (other than High Court) or Tribunal or before 
any authority to the Appellate Tribunal as provided in the Bill;  
 
x) it also proposes to make consequential amendments in the Prevention of 
Money -Laundering Act, 20024. 
  
                                            
4 India. 15th Lok Sabha, 58th Report  of Standing Committee on Finance  (2011 -12) 4 
 
 Benami Transactio ns (Prohibition) Bill, 2011  was referred to the standing 
committee on finance  on 13 September 201 1. . The Committee presented  its report on  
26 June 201 2 containing the following key recommendations .  
 Extension of provisions of Bill to the State of Jammu and Kashmir also in 
consultation  with the State Government , k eeping in view the economic gravity,  
 Maximum punishment up to 3 years as prescribed under  the existing  Benami  
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988  
 No exemption other than purchasing property, by any person in the name of 
his/her spouse or unamarried daughter  
 Reference to the mandate derived from United Nations Convention Against 
Corruption to be made.  
 Government to look into the entire gamut of exempted as well as non -prohibitive 
list of transactions and make it minimal so  that unscrupulous elements don't 
circumvent the provisions of the law.  
 Income -tax authorities and authorities under the Prevention of Money Lau ndering 
Act, 2002 should act in a coordinated manner with registration authorities to track 
illegal transactions  
 Maximum period of six months fr om the enactment of the law be  prescribed to 
make rules so that fate of Benami  Transactions (Prohibition) Act,  1988 is not 
repeated5 
 
However, t he Bill lapsed when the 15th Lok   Sabha was dissolved .  
 After coming into power in May, 2014 t he NDA Government have announced a 
host of measures to curb black money  in domestic economy and abroad  demonstrating 
its seriou sness in curbing the generation of unaccounted wealth.  The benami  deals are 
widespread and is one of the main cause for proliferation of black money.  Recognising 
the limitations under the existing legislation , the Benami  Transactions (Prohibition) 
Amendme nt Bill, 2015 was introduced to strengthen the Benami  Transactions 
(Prohibition) Act,1988,    
 
The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2015    
  The Benami  Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2015  which was  
introduced  in Lok Sabha on May  13, 2015  is aimed at curbing the circulation of 
undisclosed income in the country which is hidden through benami  properties. The Bill 
                                            
5 Hindu Business Line, April 12, 2015  5 
 
seeks to: (i) amend the definition of benami transactions, (ii) establish adjudicating  
authorities and an Appellate Tribu nal to deal with benami  transactions, and (iii) specify 
the penalty for entering into benami  transactions.   
 The Ac t, 1988 defines a benami  transaction as a transaction where a property is 
held by or transferred to a person, but has been provided for or pa id by another person.   
The Bill amends this definition to add other transactions which qualify as benami . Under 
the Act, an Authority to acquire benami  properties was to be established by the Rules.   
The Bill seeks to establish four authorities to conduct inquiries or investigations 
regarding benami  transactions: (i) Initiating Officer, (ii) Approving Authority, (iii) 
Administrator and (iv) Adjudicating Authority.  Under the Act, the penalty for entering into 
benami  transactions is imprisonment up to three years, or a fine, or both.   The Bill seeks 
to change this penalty to rigorous imprisonment of not less than one year which may be 
extend to seven years,  and a fine which may extend to 25% of the fair market value of 
the benami  property.   
 The Benami  Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2015, inter -alia, provides 
for the following namely: —  
(1) It defines a benami transaction and benami property and also provides for 
exclusions and transactions which shall not be construed benami: — 
(a) A benami  transaction has been defined as — 
(i) Where a property is transferred to or held by a person and the 
consideration for such property has been provided or paid by another 
person and the property is held for the immediate or future benefit, direct 
or indirect, of the person providing the consideration  ;  
(ii) Where the person who owns the property denies knowledge of the 
ownership;   
(iii) Where the person providing consideration for the property i.e. real 
beneficiary  is not traceable or fictitious;  
(iv) Where the transaction carried out or made in a fictitious name.  
 
(b) benami  property is defined as any property  which is the subject matter a benami   
transaction  i.e. Benami  Transactions shall include Assets of any kind — movable, 
immovable, tangible, intangible, any right or interest, or legal documents, etc.  
 
(c) Pr operties excluded from the definition of benami  transaction are: —  
(i) Property held in the name of the children or spouse acquired through 
known  sources of income;  6 
 
(ii) Properties acquired out of the known sources of income in joint ownership 
with the brother or  sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant ;   
(iii) Properties acquired out of the known sources of income of the Hindu 
undivided family which are held by a coparcener  in a Hindu undivided 
family ; 
(iv) Property held by a person in fiduciary capacity such as a trus tee, 
executor, partner or director of a company.  
 The above transactions shall not be treated as benami  transactions and 
accordingly shall not be subjected to any penal consequences.  
 (2) It provides the consequences of entering into a prohibited benami 
transactions which are: — 
(a) Whoever is found guilty of the offence of benami  transaction  shall be punishable 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one yea r but which 
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to a fine which may extend to 
twenty -five per cent of the fair market value of the property.   
(b) A benami  property shall also be liable for confiscation by the Adjudicating Authority.  
(3) It lays down the procedure for determination and related penal consequences 
in the case of a prohibited benami transaction to be as under: — 
(a) Proceedings for inquiring into an alleged benami  transaction are to be in itiated by 
the Initiating Officer;  
(b) Th e Initiating Officer will refer the case to the Adjudicating Authority set up under the 
proposed Bill;  
(c) The Adjudicating Authority, after providing an opportunity of being heard to the 
alleged benamidar , the beneficial owner, any interested party includ ing a banking 
company and any other person who makes a claim in respect of the property, shall pass 
an order within one year, holding the property to be a benami  property or otherwise;  
(d) An appeal against the order of Adjudicating Authority shall lie wit h the Appellate 
Tribunal set up under the Bill;  
(e) An appeal against the orders of the Appellate Tribunal shall lie with the jurisdictional 
High Court;  
(f) After the order of Adjudicating Authority becomes final, it shall confiscate the 
properties held benami ; 7 
 
(g) Confiscated properties are to be managed and disposed of by officers of the rank of 
Income -tax Officer who shall be designated by the Central Government as 
Administrators.  
 (4) It also provides that —  
(a) the powers of civil court shall be availa ble to authorities under the said Act;  
(b) miscellaneous provisions have been provided for service of notice, protection of 
action taken in good faith, etc.;  
(c) the Central Government has been empowered to make rules for the implementation 
of the provisio ns of the Bill;  
(d) it enables the Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High 
Court, to designate  one or more Courts of Session as Special Court or Special Courts 
for the purpose of the Bill; (e) it provides penalty for entering  into benami  transactions 
and for furnishing any false documents in any proceeding under the Bill;  
(f) it provides for transfer of any suit or proceeding in respect of a benami  transaction 
pending in any court (other than High Court) or Tribunal or before  any authority to the 
Appellate Tribunal as provided in the Bill6.  
 The bill has been referred to the parliamentary standing  Committee for 
consideration and recommendations, if any.  
  The absence of a strong law to deal with the deep rooted malady of benami  
transaction continues to be an obstacle in the process of healthy business development 
in India.  If the bill is passed,  strict enforcement of the Benami  Transactions (Prohibition) 
Act, 1988, could unearth black money hidden through benami  properties and make 
property accumulation difficult for corrupt persons and also work as a deterrent for 
others.     
                                            
6 The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Bill,  2015  (as introduced in Lok Sabha).  
1 
 THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
PREAMBLE   
 
I.—PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Commencement of Act.  
2. Extent of Act.  
Extent of power to grant relief generally, and to make decrees of dissolution, or of nullity.  
3. Interpretation -clause.  
 
II.—JURISDICTION  
4.  Matrimonial jurisdiction of High Courts to be exercised subject to Act.  Exception.   
5. Enforcement of decrees or orders made heretofore by Supreme or High Court.   
6. Pending suits.   
7. [Omitted .].  
8. Extraordinary jurisdiction of High Court.  
Power to transfer suits.  
9. Reference to High Court.  
III.—DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE  
10. Grounds for dissolution of marriage  
10A .Dissolution of marriage by mutual consent.  
11. Adulterer to be co -respondent.   
12. Cour t to be satisfied of absence of collusion.   
13. Dismissal of petition.   
14. Power to Court to pronounce decree for dissolving marriage.  
Condonation.  
15. Relief in case of opposition on certain grounds.  
16. Decrees for dissolution to be nisi. 
Collusion.  
17. Power of High Court to remove certain suits.  
17A. [Omitted .]. 
 
 
  2 
 IV.—NULLITY OF MARRIAGE  
SECTIONS  
18. Petition for decree of nullity.  
19. Grounds of decree.   
20. [Omitted .]. 
21. Children of annulled marriage.  
V.—JUDICIAL  SEPARATION  
22. Bar to decree for divorce a mensa et toro; but judicial separation obtainable by husband or 
wife.  
23. Application for separation made by petition.  
24. Separated wife deemed spinster with respect to after -acquired property.  
25. Separated wife deemed spinste r for purposes of contract and suing.  
Reversal of Decree of Separation  
26. Decree of separation obtained during absence of husband or wife may bereversed.   
VI.— PROTECTION -ORDERS  
27. Deserted wife may apply to court for protection . 
28. Court may grant protection -order.  
29. Discharge or variation of orders.  
30. Liability of husband seizing wife’s property after notice of order.  
31. Wife’s legal position during continuance of order.  
VII.—RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL  RIGHTS  
32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights.  
33. Answer to petition.  
VIII. —DAMAGES AND COSTS  
 
34. [Omitted .]. 
35. [Omitted .]. 
IX.—ALIMONY  
36. Alimony pendente lite . 
37. Power to order permanent alimony.  
Power to order monthly or weekly payments.  
38. Court may direct payment of alimon y to wife or to her trustee.  
X.—SETTLEMENTS  
39. [Omitted .]. 
40. Inquiry into existence of ante -nuptial or post -nuptial settlements.  3 
 XI.—CUSTODY OF CHILDREN  
SECTIONS  
41. Power to make orders as to custody of children in suit for separation . 
42. Power to make such orders after decree.  
43. Power to make orders as to custody of children  in suits for dissolution or nullity.  
44. Power to make suc h orders after decree or confirmation.  
XII.—PROCEDURE  
45. Code of Civil Procedure to apply.  
46. Forms of petitions and statements.  
47. Petition to state absence of collusion.  
 Statements  to be verified.  
48. Suits on behalf of lunatics.  
49. Suits by minors.  
50. Service of petition.  
51. Mode of taking evidence.  
52. Competence of husband and wife to give evidence as to cruelty or desertion.  
53. Power to close doors.  
54. Power to adjourn.  
55. Enforcement of, and appeals from, orders and decrees.  
No appeal as to  costs.  
56. Appeal to the Supreme Court.  
XIII. —RE-MARRIAGE  
57. Liberty to parties to marry again.  
58. English clergyman not compelled to solemnize marriages of persons divorced for adultery.  
59. English Minister refusing to perform ceremony to permit use o f his Church.  
XIV. —MISCELLANEOUS  
60. Decree for separation or protection -order valid as to persons dealing withwife before reversal.  
Indemnity of persons making payment to wife without notice of reversal ofdecree or protection -
order.  
61. Bar of suit for criminal conversation.   
62. Power to make rules.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  
SCHEDULE OF FORMS  
NOS. 
1. Petition by husband for a dissolution of marriage with damages againstco -respondent, by reason 
of adultery.  
2. Respondent ’s statement in answer to No. 1.  
3. Co-respondent ’s statement in answer to No. 1.  
4. Petition for decree of Nullity of Marriage.  
5. Petition by wife for judicial separation on the ground of her husband ’s adultery.  
6. Statement in answer to No. 5.   
7. Statement in reply to No. 6.   
8. Petition  for a judicial separation by reason of cruelty.  
9. Statement in answer to No. 8.  
10. Petition for reversal of decree of separation.   
11. Petition for protection -order.   
12. Petition for  Alimony pending the suit.  
13. Statement in answer to No. 12.  
14. Undertaking by minor ’s next friend to be answerable for respondent ’s costs.   
 5 
 THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869  
ACT NO. 4 OF 18691 
[26th February , 1869.]  
An Act to amend the law relating to Divorce and Matrimonial Causes  2***. 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend the law relating to the divorce of persons 
professing the Christian religion, and to confer upon certain Courts jurisdiction in matters 
matrimonial; it is hereby enacted as follows: — 
I.—PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. Commencement of Act. —This Act may be called the 3*** Divorce Act, and shall 
come into operation on the first day of April, 1869.  
2. Extent of Act .—4[This Act extends to 5[the whole of India 6[except the state of Jammu and 
Kashmir *]].] 
Extent of power to grant relief generally .—7[Nothing hereinafter contained shall 
authorise any Court to grant any relief under this Act except where the petitioner 8[or 
respondent] professes the Christian religion,  
and to make decrees of dissolution .—or to make decrees of dissolution of marriage except where 
the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time when the petition is presented,  
or of nullity. —or to make decrees of nullity of marriage except where the marriage has 
been solemnized in India and the petitioner is resident in In dia at the time of presenting the 
petition,  
or to grant any relief under this Act, other than a decree of dissolution of marriage or of 
nullity of marriage, except where the petitioner resides in India at the time of presenting the 
petition.]  
3.Interpretat ion-clause.—In this Act,  unless there be something repugnant in the subject or  
context,— 
9[(1) “High Court ”.—“High Court ” means with reference to any area: — 
(a)in a State, the High Court for that State;  
10[(b)in Delhi, the High Court of Delhi;  
(bb)in Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana up to and  inclusive of the 
30th April, 1967 and the High Court of Delhi thereafter;]  
(c) in Manipur and Tripura, the High Court of Assam;  
(d) in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the High Court at Calcu tta; 
(e) in11[Lakshadweep], the High Court of Kerala;  
12[(ee) in Chandigarh, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana;]  
                                                      
1. For Statement of Objects and Reasons, see Calcutta Gazette, 1863, p. 173; for Report of Select Committee, see Gazette of India, 1869, p. 
192; for Proceedings in Council, see Calcutta Gazette, 1862, Supplement, p. 463, ibid., 1863, Supplement, p. 43, and Gazette of India, 
1869, Supplement, p. 291.  
2. The words “in India” omitted by Act of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
3. The word “Indian” omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by A.O. 1948, for first paragraph  
5. Subs by A.O. 195 0, for certain words.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “except Part B States”.  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 1926, s. 2, for paras. 2, 3 and 4.  
9. Ins. by Act 30 of 1927, s. 2.  
10. Subs. by A daption of Laws  (No. 2) 1956, for clause ( 1). 
11. Subs. by the Himachal Pradesh (Adaptation of Laws on State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968, for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -11-
1966).  
12. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Adaptation of Laws Order, 1974, for “the Laccadiv e, 
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
13. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation (Chandigarh) (Adaptation of Laws on State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
*.Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019 , this Act is made applicable to the Union ter ritory of Jammu and Kashmir 
and the Union territory of Ladakh . 6 
 and in the case of any petition under this Act, “High Court” means the High Court for the area where 
the husband and wife reside or last resid ed together ;] 
1[(2) “District Judge ” means a Judge of a principal civil court of original jurisdiction however 
designated ;] 
(3) “District Court ” means, in the case of any petition under this Act, the court of the District 
Judge within the local limits of whose ordinary jurisdiction,  2[or of whose jurisdiction under this Act 
the marriage was solemnized or]   the husband and wife reside or last resid ed together ; 
(4) “Court ” means the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be ; 
(5) “minor children ” means, in the case of sons of Native fathers, boys, who have not completed 
the age of sixteen years, and, in the case of daughters of Native fathe rs, girls who have not completed 
the age of thirteen years ; In other cases it means unmarried children who have not completed the age 
of eighteen years ; 
3[*   *   *   *   *] 
4[*   *   *   *   *] 
(8) “marriage with another woman ” means marriage of any person, being married, to any other 
person, during the life of the former wife, whether the second marriage shall have taken place 
within  5[India] or elsewhere ; 
(9) “desertion ”, implies an abandonment against the wish of the person c harging it; and  
(10) “property ” includes in the case of a wife , any proper ty to which she is entitled for an estate in 
remainder or reversion or as a trustee, executrix or administratr ix; and the date of the death of the 
testator or intestate shall be deemed to be the time at which any such wife becomes entitled as 
executrix or administratr ix. 
II.—JURISDICTION  
4. Matrimonial jurisdiction of High Courts to be exercised subject to Act . Exception .—The 
jurisdiction now exercised by the High Courts in respect of divorce a mensa et toro , and in all other 
causes, suits and matters matrimonial, shall be exercised by such courts and by the District Courts 
subject to the provisions in this Act c ontained, and not otherwise ; except so far as relates to the 
granting of marriage -licenses, which may be granted as if this Act had not been passed.  
5. Enforcement of decrees or orders made heretofore by Supreme or High Court .—Any 
decree or order of the la te Supreme Court of Judicature at Calcutta, Madras or Bombay sitting on the 
ecclesiastical side, or of any of the said High Courts sitting in the exercise of their matrimonial 
jurisdiction, respectively, in any cause or matter matrimonial, may be enforced and dealt with by the 
said High Courts, respec tively, as hereinafter mentioned, in like manner as if such decree or order had 
been originally made under this Act by the Court so enforcing  or dealing with the same.  
6. Pending suits .—All suits and proceedin gs in causes and matters matrimonial, which when this 
Act comes into operation are pending in any High Court, shall be dealt with and decided by such 
court, so far as may be, as if they had been originally instituted therein under this Act.  
7. [Court to ac t on principles of English Divorce Court ].—[Omitted by the IndianDivorce 
(Amendment) Act, 2001  (51 of 2001 ), s. 4 (w.e.f.  3-10-2001).]  
8. Extraordinary jurisdiction of High Court. —The High Court may, whenever it thinks fit, 
remove and try and determine as a Court of original jurisdiction any suit or proceeding instituted 
under this Act in the Court of any District Judge within the limits of its jurisdiction un der this Act.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for clause ( 2). 
2. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 3, for “or of whose jurisdiction under this Act” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Clause ( 6) omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3-10-2001).  
4. Clause ( 7) omitted by s. 3 ibid,(w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the dominions of Her Majesty”.  7 
 Power to transfer suits. —The High Court may also withdraw any such suit or proceeding, and 
transfer it for trial or disposal to the Court of any other such District Judge.  
9. Reference to High Court. —When any question of law or usage having the force of law arises 
at any point in  the proceedings previous to the hearing of any suit under this Act by a District Court or 
at any subsequent stage of such suit, or in the execution of the dec ree therein or order thereon,  
the Court may, either of its own motion or on the application of an y of the parties, draw up a 
statement of the case and refer it, with the Court ’s own opinion thereon, to the decision of the High 
Court.  
If the question has arisen previous to or in the hearing, the District Court may either stay such 
proceedings, or proce ed in the case pending such reference, and pass a decree contingent upon the 
opinion of the High Court upon it.  
If a decree or order has been made, its execution shall be stayed until the receipt of the order of the 
High Court upon such reference.  
III.—DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE  
1[10. Grounds for dissolution of marriage .—(1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or 
after the commencement  of the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act,  2001  (51 of 2001) , may, on a 
petition presented to the Dis trict Court either by the husband or the wife, be dissolved on the ground 
that since the solemnization of the marriage, the respondent — 
(i) has committed adultery; or  
(ii) has ceased to be Christian by conversion to another religion; or  
(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind for a continuous period of not less than two years 
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; or  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(v) has, for a period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the 
petition, been suffering from ven ereal disease in a communi cable form; or  
(vi) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons 
who would naturally have heard of the respondent if the respondent had been alive; or  
(vii) has  wilfully refused to con summate the marriage and the marriage has not therefore been 
consummated; or  
(viii) has failed to comply with a decree for restitution of conjugal rights for a period of two 
years or upwards after the passing of the decree against the respondent; or  
(ix) has deserted the petitioner for at least two years immediately preced ing the presentation of 
the petition; or  
(x) has treated the petitioner with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in the 
mind of the petitioner that it would be harmful or injurious for the petitioner to live with the 
respondent.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 5, for section 10 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Clause ( iv) omitted  by Act 6 of 2019 , s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019) .  
 8 
 (2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her marriage on the ground that the 
husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.]  
1[10A .Dissolution of marriage by mutual consent .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act 
and the rules made thereunder, a petition for dissolution of marriage may be presented to the District 
Court by both the parties to a marriage together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or 
after the commencement  of the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act, 2001  (51 of 2001) , on the ground 
that they have been living separately for a period of two years or more, that they have not been able to 
live together and they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.  
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of presentation 
of the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than eighteen months after the sa id date, if 
the petition is not withdrawn by both the parties in the mean time, the Court shall, on being satisfied, 
after hearing the parties and making such inquiry, as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized 
and that the averments in the peti tion are true, pass a decree declaring the marriage to be dissolved 
with effect from the date of decree. ] . 
2[11. Adulterer or adulteress to be co -respondent .—On a petition for dissolution of marriage 
presented by a husband or wife on the ground of adultery, the petitioner shall make the alleged 
adulterer or adulteress a co -respondent, unless the petitioner is excused by the Court from so doing on 
any of the following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the wife, being the respondent is leading the life of a prostitute or the husband, being 
respondent is leading an immoral life and that the petitioner knows of no person with whom the 
adultery has been committed;  
 (b) that the name of the alleged adulterer or adulteress is unknown to the petitioner although 
the petitioner has made due efforts to discover it;  
 (c) that the alleged adulterer or adulteress is dead.] . 
12. Court to be satisfied of absence of collusion .—Upon any such petition for the dissolution of 
a marriage, the Court shall satisfy itself, so far as  it reasonably can, not only as to the facts alleged, 
but also whether or not the petitioner has been in any manner accessory to, or conniving at, the going 
through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery, or has condoned the same, and shall also enq uire 
into any countercharge which may be made against the petitioner.  
13.  Dismissal of petition .—In case the Court, on the evidence in relation to any such petition, is 
satisfied that the petitioner ’s case has not been proved, or is not satisfied that the  alleged adultery has 
been committed,  
or finds that the petitioner has, during the marriage, been accessory to, or conniving at, the going 
through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery of the other party to the marriage, or has 
condoned the adulter y complained of,  
or that the petition is presented or prosecuted in collusion with either of the respondents,  
then and in any of the said cases the Court shall dismiss the petition.  
3 *   *   *   *   *    
14. Power to court to pronounce decree for dissolvi ng marriage .—In case the Court is satisfied 
on the evidence that the case of the petitioner has been proved,  
and does not find that the petitioner has been in any manner accessory to, or conniving at, the 
going through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery of the other party to the marriage, or has 
condoned the adultery complained of,  
or that the petition is presented or prosecuted in collusion with either of the re spondents,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 2001, s . 6. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 11 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Last paragraph  of section 13  omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  9 
 the Court shall pronounce a decree declaring such marriage to be dissolve d 1***: 
Provided that the Court shall not be bound to pronounce such decree if it finds that the petitioner 
has, during the marriage, been guilty of adultery,  
or if the petitioner has, in the opinion of the Court, been guilty of unreasonable delay in prese nting 
or prosecuting such petition,   
or of cruelty towards the other party to the marriage,  
or of having deserted or wilfully separated himself or herself from the other party before the 
adultery complained of, and without reasonable excuse,  
or of such wilful neglect or misconduct of or towards the other party as has conduced to the 
adultery.  
Condonation . No adultery shall be deemed to have been condoned within the meaning of this Act 
unless where conjugal cohabitation has been resumed or continued.  
15. Relief in case of opposition on certain grounds .—In any suit instituted for dissolution of 
marriage, if the respondent opposes the relief sought on the ground, in case of such a suit instituted by 
a husband, of his adultery, cruelty, or desertion  2*** or, in case of such a suit instituted by a wife, on 
the ground of   3[her adultery or cruelty or desertion], the Court may in such suit give to the 
respondent, on his or her application, the same relief to which he or she would have been entitled in 
case he or she had presented a petition seeking such relief, and the respondent shall be competent to 
give evidence of or relating to  4[such adultery, cruelty] or desertion.  
16.  Decrees for dissolution to be nisi.—Every decree for dissolution of marriage made by a H igh 
Court  5*** shall in the first instance, be a decree nisi, not to be made absolute till after the expiration 
of such time, not less than six months from the pronouncing thereof, as the High Court, by general or 
special order from time to time, directs.  
Collusion . During that period any person shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Court by 
general or special order from time to time direct s, to show cause why the said decree should not be 
made absolute by reason of the same having been obtained b y collusion or by reason of material facts 
not being brought before the Court.  
On cause being so shown, the Court shall deal with the case by making the decree absolute, or by 
reversing the decree nisi, or by requiring further inquiry, or otherwise as just ice may demand.  
The High Court may order the cost of Counsel and witnesses and otherwise arising from such 
cause being shown, to be paid by the parties or such one or more of them as it thinks fit, including a 
wife if she have separate property.  
Whenever a  decree nisi has been made, and the petitioner fails, within a reasonable time, to move 
to have such decree made absolute, the High Court may dismiss the suit.  
6[17. Power of High Court to remove certain suits .—During the progress of the suit in the Court 
of the District Judge, any person suspecting that any parties to the suit are or have been acting in 
collusion for the purpose of obtaining  a divorce, shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Court 
by general or special order from time to time direc ts, to apply to the High Court to remove the suit 
under section 8, and the Court shall thereupon, if it thinks fit, remove such suit and try and determine 
the same as a Court of original jurisdiction, and the provisions contained in section 16 shall apply to 
every suit so removed; or it may direct the  District Judge to take such steps in respect of the alleged 
collusion as may be neces sary, to enable him to make a decree in accordance with the justice of the 
case.]  
                                                      
1. The words  “in the manner and subject to all the provisions and limitation in section 16 and 17 made declared” in 
paragraph 4 of section 14 omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 9 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. The words “without reasonable excuse,” omitted by s. 10 , ibid., (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “her adultery and cruelty” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “such cruelty” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. The words “not being a confirmation of a decree of a District Court ” omitted by s. 11 , ibid., (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
6. Subs . by s. 12, ibid., for section 17 (w.e.f 3 -10-2001).  10 
 17A. [Appointment of officer to exercise duties of King ’s Proctor ].—[Omitted  by the Indian  
Divorce ( Amendment ) Act, 2001 (5 1 of  2001),  s. 13 (w.e.f . 3-10-2001).]  
IV.—NULLITYOF  MARRIAGE  
18. Petition for decree of nullity .—Any husband or wife may present a petition to the District 
Court  1***, praying that his or her marriage may be declared null and void.  
19. Grounds of decree .—Such decree may be made on any of the following grounds: — 
(1) that the respondent was impotent at the time of the marriage and at the time of the 
institution of the sui t; 
(2) that the parties are within the prohibited degree of consanguinity (whether natural or legal) 
or affinity;  
(3) that either party was a lunatic or idiot at the time of the marriage;  
(4) that the former husband or wife of either party was living at the time of the marriage, and 
the marriage with such former husband or wife was then in force.  
Nothing in this section shall affect the  2[jurisdiction of the District Court] to make decrees of 
nullity of marriage on the ground that the consent of either pa rty was obtained by force or fraud.  
20. [Confirmation of District Judge ’s decree ].—[Omitted by the Indian Divorce (Amendment ) Act, 
2001 (51 of 2001),  s. 16 (w.e.f . 3-10-2001).]  
21. Children of annulled marriage .—Where a marriage is annulled on the ground that a former 
husband or wife was living, and it is adjudged that the subsequent marriage was contracted in good 
faith and with the full belief of the parties that the former husband or wife was dead, or when a 
marriage is annulled on the ground of insanit y, children begotten before the decree is made shall be 
specified in the decree, and shall be entitled to succeed, in the same manner as legitimate children, to 
the estate of the parent who at the time of the marriage was competent to contract.  
V. —JUDICIA L SEPARATION  
22. Bar to decree for divorce a mensa et toro ; but judicial separation obtainable by husband 
or wife .—No decree shall hereafter be made for a divorce a mensa et toro , but the husband or wife 
may obtain a decree of judicial separation, on the g round of adultery, or cruelty, or desertion  3*** for 
two years or upwards, and such decree shall have the effect of a divorce a mensa et toro  under the 
existing law, and such other legal effect as here in after mentioned.  
23. Application for separation mad e by petition .—Application for judicial sepa ration on any 
one of the grounds aforesaid, may be made by either husband or wife by petition to the District Court  
4***, and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that 
there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree judicial separation 
accordingly.  
24. Separated wife deemed spinster with respect to after -acquired property .—In every case of 
a judicial separation under this Act, the wife shall from the date of the sentence, and whilst the 
separation continues, be considered as unmarried with respect to property of every description which 
she may acquire, or which may come to or devolve upon her.  
Such property may be disposed of by her  in all respects as an unmarried woman, and on her 
decease the same shall, in case she dies intestate, go as the same would have gone if her husband had 
been then dead:  
Provided that, if any such wife again cohabits with her husband, all such property as s he may be 
entitled to when such cohabitation takes place shall be held to her separate use, subject, however, to 
any agreement in writing made between herself and her husband whilst separate.  
                                                      
1. The words “or to the High Court” omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 14 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for “jurisdiction of the High Court” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. The words “without reasonable excuse” omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. The words “or to the High Court” omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  11 
 25. Separated wife deemed spinster for purposes of contract and suing .—In every case of a 
judicial separation under this Act, the wife shall, whilst so separated, be considered as an unmarried 
woman for the purposes of contract, and wrongs and injuries, and suing and being sued in any civil 
proceedings; and her husband  shall not be liable in respect of any contact, act or costs entered into, 
done, omitted or incurred by her during the separation:  
Provided that where, upon any such judicial separation, alimony has been decreed or ordered to be 
paid to the wife, and the s ame is not duly paid by the husband, he shall be liable for necessaries 
supplied for her use:  
Provided also that nothing shall prevent the wife from joining, at any time during such separation, 
in the exercise of any joint power given to herself and her hu sband.  
Reversal of Decree of Separation  
26. Decree of Separation  obtained during absence of husband or wife may be                       
reversed. —Any husband or wife, upon the application of whose wife or husband, as the case may be, 
a decree of judicial separation has been pronounced, may, at any time thereafter, present a petition to 
the Court by which the decree was pronounced, praying for a reversal of such decree, on the ground 
that it was obtained in his or her absence, and that there was reasonable excuse for the alleged 
desertion, where desertion was the ground of such decree.  
The Court may, on being satisfied of the truth of the allegations of such petition reverse the decree 
accordingly; but such reversal shall not prejudice or affect the rights o r remedies which any other 
person would have had, in case it had not been decreed, in respect of any debts, contracts, or acts of 
the wife incurred, entered into, or done between the times of the sentence of separation and of the 
reversal thereof.  
VI.—PROT ECTION -ORDERS  
27. Deserted wife may apply to court for protection .—Any wife to whom section 4 of the 
Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865)1does not apply, may, when deserted by her husband, 
present a petition to the District Court  2***, at any time afte r such desertion, for an order to protect 
any property which she may have acquired or may acquire, and any property of which she may have 
become possessed or may become possessed after such desertion, against her husband or his creditors, 
or any person cla iming under him.  
28. Court may grant protection -order .—The Court, if satisfied of the fact of such desertion, and 
that the same was without reasonable excuse, and that the wife is maintaining herself by her own 
industry or property, may make and give to the wife an order protecting her earnings and other 
property from her husband and all creditors and persons claiming under him. Every such order shall 
state the time at which the desertion com menced, and shall, as regards all persons dealing with the 
wife in reliance thereon, be conclusive as to such time.  
29. Discharge or variation of orders .—The husband or any creditor of, or person claiming under 
him, may apply to the Court by which such order was made for the discharge or variation thereof, and 
the Court, if the desertion has ceased, or if for any other reason it thinks fit so to do, may discharge or 
vary the order accordingly.  
30. Liability of husband seizing wife ’s property after notice of order .—If the husband, or any 
creditor of, or person claimi ng under, the husband, seizes or continues to hold any property of the 
wife after notice of any such order, he shall be liable, at the suit of the wife (which she is hereby 
empowered to bring), to return or deliver to her the specific property, and also to  pay her a sum equal 
to double its value.  
31. Wife’s legal position during continuance of order .—So long as any such order of protection 
remains in force the wife shall be and be deemed to have been, during such desertion of her, in the 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
2. The words “or the High  Court ” omitted by Act 51  of 2001, s . 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  12 
 like position in al l respects, with regard to property and contracts and suing and being sued, as she 
would be under this Act if she obtained a decree of judicial separation.  
VII.— RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL  RIGHTS  
32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights .—When either th e husband or the wife has, 
without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, either wife, or husband may 
apply, by petition to the District Court  1*** for restitution of conjugal rights, and the Court, on being 
satisfied of the truth of t he state ments made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the 
application should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.  
33. Answer to petition .—Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to a petition for restituti on of 
conjugal rights, which would not be ground for a suit for judicial separation or for a decree of nullity 
of marriage.  
VIII. —DAMAGES AND COSTS  
34. [Husband may claim damages from adulterer ].—[Omitted by the Indian Divorce 
(Amendment) Act, 2001 (51 of 2001),  s. 19 (w.e.f.  3-10-2001)] . 
35. [Power to order adulterer to pay costs ].—[Omitted  by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f.  3-10-2001)].  
IX.—ALIMONY  
36. Alimony pendente  lite.—In any suit under this Act, whether it be instituted by a husband or a 
wife, and whether or not she has obtained an order of protection  2[the wife may present a petition for 
expenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the suit .] 
Such petition shall be served on the husband; and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the 
statements therein contained, may make such order on the husband  3[for payment to the wife of the 
expenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the suit]  alimony pending the suit as it may deem 
just: 
4*   *   *   *   * 
5[Provided further that the petition for the e xpenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the 
suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days of service of such petition on the 
husband.]  
37.  Power to order permanent alimony .—6[Where a decree of dissolution of the marriage or a 
decree of judicial separation is obtained by the wife, the District Court may order that the husband 
shall]  to the satisfaction of the court, secure to the wife such gross sum of money, or such annual sum 
of money for any term not exceeding her own life, as,  having regard to her fortune (if any), to the 
ability of the husband, and to the conduct of the parties, it thinks reasonable; and for that purpose may 
cause a proper instrument to be executed by all necessary parties.  
Power to order monthly or weekly pay ments .—In every such case the Court may make an order 
on the husband for payment to the wife of such monthly or weekly sums for her maintenance and 
support as the Court may think reasonable:  
Provided that if the husband afterwards from any cause becomes un able to make such payments, it 
shall be lawful for the Court to discharge or modify the order, or temporarily to suspend the same as 
to the whole or any part of the money so ordered to be paid, and again to revive the same order wholly 
or in part as to the  court seems fit.  
  
                                                      
1. The words “or the High Court ” omitted by Act 51  of 2001, s . 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 2, for “the wife may present a petition for alimony pending the suit ” (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “for payment to the wife of alimony pending the suit ” (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
4. The proviso omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 21 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s . 2 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
6. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 22, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  13 
 38.  Court may direct payment of alimony to wife or to her trustee .—In all cases in which the 
Court makes any decree or order for alimony, it may direct the same to be paid either to the wife 
herself, or to any trustee on her behalf to be approved by the court, and may impose any terms or 
restrictions which to the Court seem expedient, and may from time to time appoint a new trustee, if it 
appears to the Court expedient so to do.  
X.—SETTLEMENTS  
39. [Power to order settlement of wife ’s property for benefit of husband and children ].—[Omitted 
by the Indian Divorce  (Amendment ) Act, 2001 (51 of 2001),   s. 23 ( w.e.f.  3-10-2001)].  
40.  Inquiry into existence of ante -nuptial or post -nuptial settlements .—1[The District Court 
may, before passing a decree for dissolution of the marriage or a decree of nullity of marriage, inquire 
into]the existence of ante -nuptial or post -nuptial settlements made on the parties whose marriage is 
the subject of the decree, and may make such orders, with reference to  the application of the whole or 
a portion of the property settled, whether for the benefit of the husband or the wife, or of the children 
(if any) of the marriage, or of both children and parents, as to the Court seems fit:  
Provided that the Court shall n ot make any order for the benefit of the parents or either of them at 
the expense of the children.  
XI.—CUSTODY OF CHILDREN  
41.  Power to make orders as to custody of children in suit for separation .—In any suit for 
obtaining a judicial separation the Court  may from time to time, before making its decree, make such 
interim orders, and may make such provision in the decree, as it deems proper with respect to the 
custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage of whose parents is the 
subject of such suit, and may, if it thinks fit, direct proceedings to be taken for placing such children 
under the protection of the said Court : 
2[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor children 
pending the s uit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of 
notice on the respondent.]  
42. Power to make such orders after decree .—The court , after a decree of judicial separation, 
may upon application (by petition) for this purpose make, from time to time, all such orders and 
provisions, with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage 
of whose parents  is the subject of the decree, or for placing such children under the protection of the 
said court, as might have been made by such decree or by interim orders in case the proceedings for 
obtaining such decree were still pending.  
43. Power to make orders a s to custody of children in suits for dissolution or nullity .—3[In 
any suit for obtaining a dissolution of marriage or a decree of nullity of marriage instituted in a 
District Court, the Court may from time to time before making its decree, make such inter im orders as 
it may deem proper] with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the 
marriage of whose parents is the subject of the suit,  
and may, if it thinks fit, direct proceedings to be taken for placing such children und er the protection 
of the court.  
44.  Power to make such orders after decree or confirmation .—4[Where a decree of dissolution 
or nullity of marriage has been passed, the District Court may, upon applica tion] by petition for the 
purpose, make from time to time all such orders and provisions, with respect to the custody, 
maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage of whose parents was the subject of 
the decree, or for placing such children under the protection of the said court , as might have 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 24, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs . by Act 51 of 2001, s . 25, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by, s . 26, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  14 
 been made by such decree absolute or decree (as the case may be), or by such interim  orders as 
aforesaid.  
XII.—PROCEDURE  
45. Code of Civil Procedure to apply .—Subject to the provisions herein contained, all 
proceedings under this Act betwe en party and party shall be regulated by the1[Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ]. 
46. Forms of petitions and statements .—The forms set forth in the Schedule to this Act, with 
such variation as the circumstances of each case require, may be used for  the respective purposes 
mentioned in such Schedule.  
47. Petition to state absence of collusion .—Every petition under this Act for a decree of 
dissolution of marriage, or of nullity of marriage, or of judicial separation  2*** shall  3*** state that 
there is  not any collusion or connivance between the petitioner and the other party to the marriage.  
Statements to be verified .—The statements contained in every petition under this Act shall be 
verified by the petitioner or some other competent person in manner required by law for the 
verification of plaints, and may at the hearing be referred to as evidence.  
48. Suits on behalf of lunatics .—When the husband or wife is a lunatic or idiot, any suit under 
this Act (other than a suit for restitution of conjugal righ ts) may be brought on his or her behalf by the 
committee or other person entitled to his or her custody.  
49. Suits by minors .—Where the petitioner is a minor, he or she shall sue by his or her next friend 
to be approved by the Court; and no petition presen ted by a minor under this Act shall be filed until 
the next friend has undertaken in writing to be answerable for costs.  
Such undertaking  4*** shall be filed in Court, and the next friend shall thereupon be liable in the same 
manner and to the same extent as if he were a plaintiff in an ordinary suit.  
50. Service of petition .—Every petition under this Act shall be served on the party to be affected 
thereby, either within or without  5[India], in such manner as the High Court by general or special 
order from time to time directs.  
Provided that the court may dispense with such service altogether in case it seems necessary or 
expedient so to do.  
51. Mode of taking evidence .—The witnesses in all proceedings before the court, where their 
attendance can be had, shall be examined orally, and any party may offer himself or herself as a 
witness, and shall be examined, and may be cross -examined and re -examined, like any other witness:  
Provided that the parties shall be at liberty to verify their respective cases in w hole or in part by 
affidavit, but so that the deponent in every such affidavit shall, on the application of the opposite 
party, or by direction of the Court, be subject to be cross -examined by or on behalf of the opposite 
party orally, and after such cross -examination may be re -examined orally as aforesaid by or on behalf 
of the party by whom such affidavit was filed.  
52. Competence of husband and wife to give evidence as to cruelty or deser tion.—On any 
petition presented,  6[by a husband or a wife, praying  that his or her marriage may be dissolved by 
reason of his wife or her husband, as the case may be, having been guilty of adultery, cruelty or 
desertion] , the husband and wife re spectively shall be competent and compellable to give evidence of 
or relatin g to such cruelty or desertion.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 27, for “Code of Civil Procedure ” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. The Words “or of reversal of judicial separation, or for restitution of conjugal rights, or for damages, shall bear a stamp of 
five rupees, and ” rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s . 2 and the Schedule III.  
3. The words “in the first, second and third cases mentioned in this section, ” rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s . 2 and the Schedule III.  
4. The words “shall bear a stamp of eight annas and ” rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s. 2 and  the Schedule III.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the Provinces , which had been substituted by the A.O. 1948, for “British India ”. 
6. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s . 28, for certain words (w.e.f 3 -10-2001).  15 
 53. Power to close doors .—The whole or any part of any proceeding under this Act may be heard, 
if the Court thinks fit, with closed doors.  
54. Power to adjourn .—The Court may, from time to time, adjourn the hearing of any pe tition 
under this Act, and may require further evidence thereon if it sees fit so to do.  
55. Enforcement of, and appeal from, orders and decree .—All decrees and orders made by the 
Court in any suit or proceedings under this Act shall be enforced and may be  appealed from, in the 
like manner as the decrees and orders of the Court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction 
are enforced and may be appealed from, under the laws, rules and orders for the time being in force:  
1*   *   *   *   * 
No app eal as to costs . —2[Provided] that there shall be no appeal on the subject of costs only.  
56. Appeal to the Supreme Court .—Any person may appeal to  3[the Supreme Court] from any 
decree (other than a decree nisi) or order under this Act of a High Court made  on appeal or otherwise,  
and from any decree (other than a decree nisi) or order made in the exercise of original jurisdiction by 
Judges of a High Court or of any Division Court from which an appeal shall not lie to the High Court,  
when the High Court declares that the case is a fit one for appeal to  3[the Supreme Court].  
XIII.—RE-MARRIAGE . 
4[57. Liberty to parties to marry again .—Where a decree for dissolution or nullity of marriage 
has been passed and either the time for appeal has expired without an appeal having been presented to 
any court including the Supreme Court or an appeal has been presented but has been dismissed and 
the decree or dismissal has become final, it shall be lawful for either party to the marriage to marry 
again.]  
58. English clergyman not compelled to solemnize marriages of persons divorced for 
adultery .—No clergyman in Holy Orders of the  5*** Church of England  6*** shall be compelled to 
solemnize the marriage of any  person whose former marriage has been dissolved on the groun d of his 
or her adultery, or shall be liable to any suit, penalty or censure for solemnizing or refusing to 
solemnize the marriage of any such person.  
59.  English Minister refusing to perform ceremony to permit use of his Church . — When any 
Minister of an y Church or Chapel of the said  5*** Church refuses to perform such marriage -service 
between any persons who but for such refusal would be entitled to have the same service performed in 
such Church or Chapel, such Minister shall permit any other Minister in  Holy Orders of the said 
Church, entitled to officiate within the di ocese in which such Church or Chapel is situate, to perform 
such marriage -service in such Church or Chapel.  
XIV.—MISCLLANEOUS  
60. Decree for separation or protection -order valid as to pers ons dealing with wife before 
reversal . — Every decree for judicial separation or order to protect property, obtained by a wife 
under this Act shall, until reversed or discharged, be deemed valid, so far as necessary, for the 
protection of any person dealin g with the wife.  
No reversal, discharge or variation of such decree or order shall affect any rights or remedies 
which any person would otherwise have had in respect of any contracts or acts of the wife entered into 
or done between the dates of such decree  or order, and of the reversal, discharge or variation thereof.  
Indemnity of persons making payment to wife without notice of reversal of decree or 
protection order . — All persons who in reliance on any such decree or order make any payment to, 
or permit any transfer or act to be made or done by, the wife who has obtained the same shall, 
notwithstanding such decree or order may then have been reversed, discharged or v aried, or the 
separation of the wife from her husband may have ceased, or at some time since the making of the 
                                                      
1. The first proviso omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 29 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “Provided also” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Her Majesty in Council”.  
4. Subs. by Act 5 1 of 2001, s. 30, for section 57 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. The word “United” rep. by Act 12 of 1873, s. 1 and the Schedule.  
6. The words “and Ireland” rep. by s. 1, ibid. and the Schedule.   16 
 decree or order been discontinued, be protected and indemnified as if, at the time of such payment, 
transfer or other act, such decree or order w ere valid and still subsisting without variation, and the 
separation had not ceased or been discontinued , 
unless, at the time of the payment, transfer or other act, such persons had notice of the reversal, 
discharge or variation of the decree or order or o f the cessation or dis continuance of the separation.  
61. Bar of suit for criminal conversation .— After this Act comes into operation, no person 
competent to present a petition under sections 2 and 10 shall maintain a suit for criminal conversation 
with hi s wife.  
62. Power to make rules .— The High Court shall make such rules under this Act as it may from 
time to time consider expedient, and may from time to time alter and add to the same:  
Provided that such rules, alterations and additions are consistent wi th the provisions of this Act and 
the1[Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ]. 
All such rules, alteration and additions shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
 
  
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 51 of 2001, s . 31, for “Code of Civil Procedure ” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
______________  
 
SCHEDULE OF FORMS  
No. 1 . —PETITION  by husband for a dissolution of marriage with damages against co -respondent, by 
reason of adultery.  
(See sections  10 and 34). 
In the (High) Court of   
To the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice      [or To the Judge of    ] 
      The  day of    186  .  
The petition of A.B., of 
SHEWETH , 
1. That your petitioner was on the   day of             , one thousand eight hundred 
and  , lawfully married to C.B., then C.D., spinster at   .  (a) 
2. That from his said married, your petitioner lived and cohabited with his said wife at                 
and at   , in  , and lastly at   , in         , and that your 
petitioner and his said wife have had issue of their said marriage,  five children, of whom  two sons 
only survive, aged respectively  twelve  and fourteen  years.  
3. That during the thr ee years immediately preceding the    day of     
one thousand eight hundred and                                 , X.Y. was constantly with a few exceptions, 
residing in the house of your petitioner at  aforesaid, and that on diverse occasions 
during the said period, the dates of which are unknown to your petitioner, the said C.B. in your 
petitioner ’s said house committed adultery with the said X.Y. 
4. That no collusion or connivance exists between me and  my said wife for the purpose of 
obtaining a dissolution of our said marriage or for any other purpose.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will decree a disso lution of the said 
marriage, and that the said X.Y. do pay the sum of ru pees 5,000 as damages by reason of his 
having committed adultery with your petitioner ’s said wife, such damages to be paid to your 
petitioner, or otherwise paid or applied as to this (Hon ’ble) Court seems fit.  
(Signed) A. B.  (a) 
Form of Verification  
 
I, A.B., the petitioner named in the above petition, do declare that what is stated therein is true to 
the best of my information and belief.  
_________  
 
No. 2 .—Respondent ’s statement in answer to No . 1 
In the court of      the   day of   , 
Between A.B., petitioner,  
  C.B., respondent, and  
      X.Y., co-respondent . 
C.B., the respondent, by D.E. her attorney ( or vakil) , in answer to the petition of A.B. says that she 
denies that she has on diverse or any occasions committed adultery with X.Y., as alleged in the third 
paragraph of the said petition.  
Wherefore the respondent prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will reject the said petition.  
(Signed) C.B. 
______________________________________________________________________________  
(a) If the marriage was solemn ized out of India, the adultery must be shown to have bee n committed in 
India.  
(b) The petition must be signed by the petitioner.  18 
  
No. 3.—Co-respondent ’s statement in answer to No.  1 
In the (High) Court of        
The      day of   
Between A.B.,  petitioner,  
C.B.,  respondent, and  
X.Y., co-respondent.  
X.Y., the co -respondent, in answer to the petition filed in this cause, saith  that he denies that he 
committed adultery with the said C.B., as alleged in the said petition.  
Wherefore the said X.Y. , prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will reject the prayer of the said petitioner 
and order him to pay the costs of and incident to the said petition.  
(Signed) X.Y. 
_____  
 
No. 4 .—PETTION  for Decree of Nullity of Marriage  
(See section  18) 
In the (High) Court of    
To the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice      [or To the  
 Judge of     ]. 
    The   day of  , 186  .  
    The Petition of A.B, falsely called A.D., 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the        day of                           , one thousand                             
eight hundred and                                                                                       , your petitioner, then a 
spinster, eighteen years of age, was married in fact, though not in law, to C.D., then a bachelor of 
about thirty years of age, at [ some place in India ]. 
2. That from the said    day of                                                    , one thousand 
eight hundred and    , until the month of              , your petitioner lived 
and cohabited with the sa id C.D.,  at diverse places, and particularly at aforesaid.  
3. That the said C.D.  has never consummated the said pretended marriage by carnal copulation.  
4. That at the time of the celebration of your petitioner ’s pretended marriage, the said C.D.  was, by 
reason of the impotency or malformation, legally incompetent to enter into the contract of marriage.  
5. That there is no collusion or connivance between her and the said C.D.  with respect to the 
subject of this suit.  
Your petitioner therefore prays that thi s (Hon ’ble) Court will declare that the said marriage is null 
and void.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verification : See No. 1 
__________  
No. 5 .—PETITION  by wife for judicial separation on the ground of her husband ’s adultery  
(See section  22) 
In the (High) Court of       To the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice 
            [or 
To the Judge of      ]. 
The     day of    , 186.
       
The petition  of C.B., of     the wife of A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the     day of    , one thousand eight 
hundred and sixty      your petitioner, then C.D.,  was lawfully 
married to A.B.,  at the Church of   , in the  19 
 2. That after her said marriage, your petitioner cohabited with the said A.B. at   and 
that your petitioner and her said husband have issue living of their said marriage, three children, to 
wit, etc., etc., ( a). 
3. That on diverse occasions in or about the months of  August , September  and October, one 
thousand eight  hundred and sixty   the, said A.B., at     
aforesaid, committed adultery with E.F., who was then living in the service of the said A.B., and your 
petitioner at their said residence      aforesaid.  
4. That on diverse occasions in the months of October , November and December,  one thousand 
eight hundred and sixty         the said A.B.,at 
    aforesaid, committed adultery with G.H., who was then living in the 
service of the said A.B. and your petitioner at their said residence   aforesaid.  
5. That no collusion or connivance exists between your petitioner and the said A.B., with respect to 
the subject of the present suit.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will decree a judicial separation to your 
petitioner from her said husband by reason of his aforesaid adultery.  
(Signed ) C.B . (b) 
Form of Verification : See No . 1 
________  
No. 6.—Statement in answer to No . 5 
In the (High) Court of  
B. against B.  
The     day of  
The respondent, A.B. by W.Y.,  his attorney [or vakil] saith, — 
1. That he denies that he committed adultery with E.F. as in the third paragraph of the petitio n 
alleged.  
2. That the petitioner condoned the said adultery with E.F., if any.  
3. That he denies that he committed adultery with G.H., as in the fourth para graph of the petition 
alleged.  
4. That the petitioner condoned the said adultery with G.H.,  if any . 
Wherefore this respondent prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will reject the prayer of the said petition.  
(Signed) A.B. 
_________  
No. 7 .—Statement in reply to No. 6  
In the (High) Court of  
B. against B. 
The      day of         
 The petitioner, C.B., by her attorney [or vakil], says — 
1. That she denies that she condoned the said adultery of the respondent with E.F. as in the second 
paragraph of the  statement in answer alleged.  
2. That even if she had condoned the said adultery, the same has been re vived by the subsequent 
adultery of the  respondent with G.H., as set forth in the fourth paragraph of the petition.  
(Signed) C.B 
__________  
________________________________________________________________________________  
(a) State the respective ages of th e children.  
(b) The petition must be signed by the petitioner.20 
 No. 8 —PETITION  for a judicial separation by reason of cruelty  
(See section  22) 
In the (High) Court of  
To the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice     [or To the Judge  of  ]. 
     The   day of     186  
      The petition of A.B. (wife of C.B.) of 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the  day of      , one thousand eight hundred and   , 
your petitioner, then  A.D., spinster, was lawfully marri ed to C.B., at  
2. That from her said marriage, your petitioner lived and cohabited with her said husband                          
at    until the   day of    , one thousand                      eight 
hundred and     , when your petitioner sepa rated from her said husband a s 
hereinafter more particularly mentioned, and that your petitioner and her said husband have had no issue of 
their said marriage.  
3. That from and shortly after your petitioner ’s said marriage, the said C.B. habitu ally conducted 
himself towards your peti tioner with great harshness and cruelty, fre quently abusing her in the coarsest and 
most insulting language, and beating her with his fists, with a cane, or with some other weapon.  
4. That on an evening in or about the month of     one thousand eight hundr ed 
and        , the said C.B.in the highway and opposite to the house 
in which your petitioner and the said C.B. were then residing at     aforesaid, 
endeavoured to knock your petitioner down, and was only prevented from so doing by the interference of 
F.D., your petitioner ’s brother.  
5. That subsequently on the same evening, the said C.B. in his said house  at  aforesaid, 
struck your petitioner with his clenched fists a violent blow on her face.  
6. That on one Friday night in the month of                    one 
thousand eight hundred and     , the said C.B., in    
without provocation, threw a knife at your petitioner, thereby inflicting a severe wound on her right hand.  
7. That on the afternoon of the    day of      one 
thousand eight hundred and          , your petitioner, by reason of the great and 
continued cruelty practi sed towards her by her said husband, with assistance withdrew from the house of 
her said husband to the house of her father at      that from and after the said
    day of                   , one thousand eight 
hundred and      your petitioner hath lived separate and apart from her said 
husband, and hath never returned to his house or to cohabitation with him.  
8. That there is no collusion or connivance between your petitioner and  her said husband with respect to 
the subject of the present suit.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will decree a judicial separation between 
your petitioner and the said C.B., and also order that the said C.B., do pay the costs of and incident 
to these proceedings.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verification : See No . 1 
______  
No. 9 .—Statement in answer to No . 8 
In the (High) Court of  
The             day of  
Between A.B., petitioner,  and  
  C.B., respondent  
C.B., the respondent, in answer  to the petition filed in this cause by W.J. his attorney [ or vakil] saith 
that he denies that he has been guilty of cruelty towards the said A.B., as alleged in the said petition.  
 
(Signed) C.B. 
 
_______21 
 No. 10.—PETITION  for reversal of decree of separation  
(See section  24) 
In the (High) Court of          To the 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice         [or To the Judge of  
   ]. 
The   day of      186
 The petition of  A.B., of  
SHEWETH , 
1. That your petitioner was on the       day of     
lawfully married to  
2. That on the    day of       this (Hon ’ble) 
Court at the petition of     ,  pronounced a decree affecting the petitioner to the 
effect following , to wit, — 
[Here set out the decree ] 
3. That such decree was obtained in the absence of you r petitioner, who was then residing at        
[State facts tending to show that the petitioner did not know of the proceedings; and further, that had 
he known he might have offered a sufficient defence .] 
or 
That there was reasonable ground for your petitio ner leaving his said wife, for that his said wife 
[Here state any legal grounds justifying the petitioner ’s separation from his wife .] 
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will reverse the said decree.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verifications: See No . 1. 
________  
 
No. 11. —PETITION  for Protection -order  
(See section  27) 
In the (High) Court of          To the 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice         [or To the Judge of  
   ]. 
The   day of    186  .   
The petition of C.B., of    the wife of 
A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
That on the      day of     she was lawfully married to 
A.B., at  
That she lived and cohabited with the said A.B. for        
years at      , and also at      , and hath 
had      children, issue of her said marriage, of whom  are now living 
with the applicant, and wholly depen dent upon her earnings.  
That on or about      the said A.B., without any reasonable cause, 
deserted the applicant, and hath ever since remined separate and apart from her.  
That since the desertion of her said husband, the applic ant hath maintained herself by her own 
industry [or on her own property , as the case may be ], and hath thereby and otherwise acquired 
certain property consisting of    [here s tate generally  the nature of the property ]. 
Wherefore she prays an order for the p rotection of her earnings and property acquired since the  
said,     day of,        from the said A.B., 
and from all creditors and persons claiming under him.  
(Signed) C.B. 
 
______22 
 No. 12.—PETITION  for Alimony pending the suit  
(See section 36) 
In the (High) Court of   
B. against B.  
To, the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice       [or To the Judge of  
  ]. 
The    day of    186           .  
The petition of C.B., the lawful 
wife of A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
1. That the said A.B. has for some years carried on the business of     , at 
     , and from such business derives the net annual income of 
from Rs . 4,000  to 5000 . 
2. That the said A.B. is possessed of plate, furniture, linen and other effects at his said house,  
   aforesaid, all of which he acquired in right of your petition er as his wife, or 
purchased with money he acquired through her, of the value of Rs. 10,000.  
3. That the said A.B. is entitled, under the will of his father, subject to the life interest of his mother 
therein to property of the value of Rs. 5,000 or some o ther considerable amount ( a). 
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will decree such sum or sums of money 
by way of alimony, pending the suit, as to this (Hon ’ble) Court may seem meet.  
(Signed) C.B. 
Form of Verification : See No. 1 
________  
No. 13.—Statement in answer to No. 12  
In the (High) Court of  
B, against B. 
A.B., of             , the above -named respondent, in 
answer to the petition for alimony, pending the suit, of C.B., says — 
1. In answer to the first paragraph of the said petition, I say that I have for the last three  years 
carried, on the business of       ,  at   and 
that, from such business, I have derived a net annual income of Rs. 900, but less than Rs. 1,000.  
2. In answer  to the second paragraph of the said petition, I say that I am possessed of plate, 
furniture, linen and other chattels and effects at my said house       
aforesaid, of the value of Rs. 7,000 , but as I verily believe of no larger value. And I say that a port ion 
of the said plate, furniture and other chattels and effects of the value of Rs. 1,500 belonged to my said 
wife before our marriage, but the remaining portions thereof I have since purchased with my own 
monies. And I say that, save as hereinbefore set f orth, I am not possessed of the plate and other effects 
as alleged in the said paragraph in the said petition, and that I did not acquire the same as in the said 
petition also mentioned.  
3. I admit that I am entitled under the will of my father, subject to  the life -interest of my mother 
therein, to property of the value of Rs. 5,000, that is to say , I shall be entitled under my said father ’s 
will, upon the death of my mother, to a legacy of Rs. 7,000, out of which I shall, have to pay to my 
father's executo rs the sum of Rs. 2,000 the amount of a debt owing by me to his estate, and upon 
which debt I am now paying interest at the rate of five per cent per annum.  
4. And, in further answer to the said petition, I say that I have no income whatever except that 
derived from my aforesaid business, that such income, since my said wife left me, which she did on 
the    day of      last, has been considerably 
diminished, and that such diminution is likely to continue. And I say that out of my said income, I 
have to pay t he annual sum of Rs. 100 for such interest as aforesaid to my late father's executors, and 
also to support myself and my two oldest children.  
________________________________________________________________________________  
(a) The Petitioner sh ould state her husband’s income as accurately as possible23 
 5. And, in further answer to the said petition, I say that, when my wife left, my dwelling -house on 
the    day of          last, 
she took with her, and has ever since withheld and still withholds fro m me, plate, watches and other 
effects in the second paragraph of this my answer mentioned, of the value of, as I verily believe,                
Rs. 800 at the least; and I also say “that, within five days of her departure from my house as aforesaid, 
my sa id wife received bills due to me from certain lodgers of mine, amounting in the aggregate to            
Rs.     and that she has ever since withheld and still withholds from me the 
same sum.  
(Signed) A.B. 
_______  
No. 14.—UNDERTAKING  by minor’s next friend to be answerable for respondent ’s costs  
(See section  49) 
In the (High) Court of          I, 
the undersigned A.B., of       being the next friend of C.D. 
who is a minor, and who is desirous of filing a petition in this Court, under the Indian Divorce Act, 
against D.D.  of      , hereby undertake to be responsible for the costs of 
the said D.D. in such suit, and that, if the said C.D. fail to pay to the said D.D.  when and in such 
manner as the court shall order all such costs of such suit as the court shall di rect him [or her] to pay 
to the said D.D., will forthwith pay the same to the proper officer of this court.  
Dated this.     day of   186     . 
(Signed) A.B. 
_______  
 
 
1 THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.   
2. Definitions.  
3. Construction of references.  
4. Trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and othe r laws . 
5. Saving . 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES  
6. Classes of Criminal Courts . 
7. Territorial divisions.  
8. Metropolitan areas.  
9. Court of Session .  
10. Subordination of Assistant Sessions Judges.  
11. Courts of Judicial Magistra tes. 
12. Chief Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, etc.  
13. Special Judicial Magistrates.  
14. Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates.   
15. Subordination of Judicial Magistrates . 
16. Courts of Metropolitan Magistrates.  
17. Chie f Metropolitan Magistrate and Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.  
18. Special Metropolitan Magistrates.  
19. Subordination of Metropolitan Magistrates.  
20. Executive Magistrates.  
21. Special Executive Magistrates.  
22. Local Jurisdiction of Executive M agistrates.  
23. Subordination of Executive Magistrates.  
24. Public Prosecutors.  
25. Assistant Public Prosecutors.  
25A.  Directorate of Prosecution.  
CHAPTER III  
POWER OF COURTS  
26. Courts by which offences are triable.   
27. Jurisdiction in the case of juveni les.  2 
 SECTIONS  
28. Sentences which High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass.  
29.  Sentences which Magistrates may pass.  
30.  Sentence of imprisonment in default of fine.  
31.  Sentence in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial.  
32.  Mode of co nferring powers.  
33.  Powers of officers appointed.  
34.  Withdrawal of powers.  
35.  Powers of Judges and Magistrates exercisable by their successors -in-office.  
CHAPTER IV  
A.–POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE  
36.  Powers of superior officers of police.  
B.–AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE  
37.  Public when to assist Magistrates and police.  
38.  Aid to person, other than police officer, executing warrant.  
39.  Public to give information of certain offences.  
40.  Duty of officers employed, in connection  with the affairs of a village to make certain report.  
CHAPTER V 
ARREST OF PERSONS  
41.  When police may arrest without warrant.  
41A. Notice of appearance before police officer.  
41B. Procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest.  
41C. Control room  at districts.  
41D. Right of arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation.  
42.  Arrest on refusal to give name and residence.  
43.  Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest . 
44.  Arrest by Magistrate.  
45.  Protection o f members of the Armed Forces from arrest.   
46.  Arrest how made.  
47.  Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested.  
48.  Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions.  
49.  No unnecessary restraint.  
50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds  of arrest and of right to bail.  
50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to a nominated person.  
51.  Search of arrested person.  3 
 SECTIONS  
52.  Power to seize offensive weapons.  
53.  Examination of accused by medical practit ioner at the request of police officer.  
53A.  Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner.  
54.  Examination of arrested person by medical officer.  
54A.  Identification of person arrested.  
55.  Procedure when police officer deputes subordi nate to arrest without warrant.  
55A.  Health and safety of arrested person.  
56.  Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in charge of police station.  
57.  Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty -four hours . 
58.  Police to repor t apprehensions . 
59.  Discharge of person apprehended . 
60.  Power, on escape, to pursue and retake.  
60A.  Arrest to be made strictly according to the Code.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE  
A.–Summons  
61.  Form of summons.  
62. Summons how served.  
63. Service of summons on corporate bodies and societies.  
64.  Service when persons summoned cannot be found.  
65.  Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided.  
66.  Service on Government servant.  
67.  Service of summons outside local limits . 
68.  Proof of service in such cases and when serving officer not present.  
69.  Service of summons on witness by post.  
B.–Warrant of arrest  
70.  Form of warrant of arrest and duration.  
71.  Power to direct security to be taken.  
72.  Warrants to whom direc ted. 
73.  Warrant may be directed to any person.  
74.  Warrant directed to police officer.  
75.  Notification of substance of warrant.   
76.  Person arrested to be brought before Court without delay.  
77.  Where warrant may be executed.  
78.  Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction.  
79.  Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside jurisdiction.  
80.  Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued.  4 
 SECTIONS  
81.  Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested is brough t. 
C.–Proclamation and attachment  
82.  Proclamation for person absconding.  
83. Attachment of property of person absconding.  
84.  Claims and objections to attachment.  
85.  Release, sale and restoration of attached property.  
86.  Appeal from order rejecting application for restoration of attached property.  
D.–Other rules regarding processes  
87. Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons.  
88.  Power to take bond for appearance.  
89. Arrest on breach of bond for appearance.  
90.  Provisions of this C hapter generally applicable to summonses and warrants of arrest.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS  
A.–Summons to produce  
91. Summons to produce document or other thing.  
92. Procedure as to letters and telegrams.  
B.–Search -warrants  
93. When search -warrant may be issued.  
94.  Search of place suspected to contain stolen property, forged documents, etc.  
95. Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to issue search -warrants for the same.  
96. Application to High Court to set aside  declaration of forfeiture.  
97. Search for persons wrongfully confined.  
98. Power to compel restoration of abducted females . 
C.–General provisions relating to searches  
99. Direction, etc., of search -warrants.  
100. Persons in charge of closed place to allow  search.  
101.  Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction.  
D.–Miscellaneous  
102. Power of police officer to seize certain property.   
103. Magistrate may direct search in his presence.  
104. Power to impound document, etc., produced.  
105. Recipro cal arrangements regarding processes.  
CHAPTER VIIA  
RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR 
ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY   
105A.  Definitions.  
105B.  Assistance in securing transfer of persons.  5 
 SECTIONS  
105C.  Assist ance in relation to orders of attachment or forfeiture of property.  
105D.  Identifying unlawfully acquired property.  
105E.  Seizure or attachment of property.  
105F.  Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter.  
105G.  Notice of forfeiture o f property.  
105H.  Forfeiture of property in certain cases.   
105-I. Fine in lieu of forfeiture.  
105J.   Certain transfers to be null and void.  
105K.  Procedure in respect of letter of request.  
105L.  Application of this Chapter . 
CHAPTER VIII  
SECURITY FOR KEEPI NG THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
106. Security for keeping the peace on conviction.  
107. Security for keeping the peace in other cases.  
108. Security for good behaviour from persons disseminating seditious matters.   
109. Security for good behaviour from  suspected persons.  
110. Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders.  
111. Order to be made.  
112. Procedure in respect of person present in Court.  
113. Summons or warrant in case of person not so present.  
114. Copy of order to accompany summons or  warrant.  
115. Power to dispense with personal attendance.  
116. Inquiry as to truth of information.  
117. Order to give security.  
118. Discharge of person informed against.  
119. Commencement of period for which security is required.  
120. Contents of bond.  
121. Power to reject sureties.   
122. Imprisonment in default of security.  
123. Power to release persons imprisoned for failing to give security.  
124. Security for unexpired period of bond.  
CHAPTER IX  
ORDER  FOR  MAINTENANCE OF  WIVES, CHILDREN AND  PARENTS  
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents.  
126. Procedure.  
127. Alteration in allowance.  
128. Enforcement of order of maintenance.   6 
 CHAPTER X  
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY  
A.–Unlawful assemblies  
SECTIONS  
129.  Dispersal of as sembly by use of civil force.  
130.  Use of armed forces to disperse assembly.  
131.  Power of certain armed force officers to disperse assembly . 
132.  Protection against prosecution for acts done under preceding sections . 
B.–Public nuisances  
133.  Condition al order for removal of nuisance.  
134.  Service or notification of order.  
135.  Person to whom order is addressed to obey or show cause . 
136.  Consequences of his failing to do so . 
137.  Procedure where existence of public right is denied . 
138.  Procedure where he appears to show cause . 
139.  Power of Magistrate to direct local investigation and examination of an expert.   
140.  Power of Magistrate to furnish written instructions, etc.  
141.  Procedure on order being made absolute and consequences of disobedi ence.   
142. Injunction pending inquiry.  
143. Magistrate may prohibit repetition or continuance of public nuisance . 
C.–Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger  
144.  Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger.  
D.–Disputes a s to immovable property  
145.  Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace . 
146.  Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint receiver . 
147.  Dispute concerning right of use of land or water . 
148.  Local inquiry . 
CHAPTER XI  
PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE  
149.  Police to prevent cognizable offences . 
150.  Information of design to commit cognizable offences . 
151.  Arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences.  
152.  Prevention of injury to public propert y. 
153.  Inspection of weights and measures . 
CHAPTER XII  
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE  
154. Information in cognizable cases . 
155. Information as to non -cognizable cases and investigation of such cases . 7 
 SECTIONS  
156. Police offi cer’s power to investigate cognizable case.  
157. Procedure for investigation.  
158. Report how submitted.  
159. Power to hold investigation or preliminary inquiry . 
160. Police officer’s power to require attendance of witnesses.  
161. Examination of witnesses by police.  
162.  Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence.  
163. No inducement to be offered.  
164. Recording of confessions and statements.  
164A. Medical examination of the victim of rape.  
165. Search by police officer.   
166. Whe n officer in charge of police station may require another to issue search -warrant.   
166A. Letter of request to competent authority for investigation in a country or place outside India.  
166B. Letter of request from a country or place outside India to a Co urt or an authority for 
investigation in India.  
167.  Procedure when  investigation cannot be completed in twenty -four hours . 
168. Report of investigation by subordinate police officer.  
169. Release of accused when evidence deficient . 
170. Cases to be sent  to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient . 
171. Complainant and witnesses not to be required to accompany police officer and not to be 
subjected to restraint . 
172.  Diary of proceedings in investigation.  
173.  Report of police officer on completion of in vestigation . 
174.  Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc.  
175.  Power to summon persons . 
176.  Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death.  
CHAPTER XIII  
JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL  COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
177. Ordinary place of inquiry and tri al. 
178. Place of inquiry or trial . 
179. Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues . 
180. Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation to other offence . 
181. Place of trial in case of certain offences . 
182. Offences committed b y letters, etc . 
183. Offence committed on journey or voyage . 
184. Place of trial for offences triable together . 
185. Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions . 
186.  High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district where inquiry or t rial shall take place . 
187.  Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed beyond local jurisdiction . 8 
 SECTIONS  
188. Offence committed outside India.  
189.  Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside India . 
CHAPTER XIV  
CONDITIONS RE QUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS  
190.  Cognizance of offences by Magistrates . 
191. Transfer on application of the accused . 
192. Making over of cases to Magistrates . 
193. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session . 
194. Additional and Assistant Sessio ns Judges to try cases made over to them.  
195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences against public 
justice and for offences relating to documents given in evidence.  
195A. Procedure for witnesses in case of threateni ng, etc.  
196. Prosecution for offences against the State and for criminal conspiracy to commit such offence.  
197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants.  
198. Prosecution for offences against marriage.  
198A. Prosecution of offences under section 498A o f the Indian Penal Code . 
198B. Cognizance of offence.  
199. Prosecution for defamation.  
CHAPTER XV  
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES  
200.  Examination of complainant.  
201.  Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of the case.  
202.  Postponement of issue of process.  
203.  Dismissal of complaint.   
CHAPTER XVI  
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES  
204. Issue of process.  
205. Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused.  
206. Special summons in cases of petty offence.  
207. Supply  to the accused of copy of police report and other documents.  
208. Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in other cases triable by Court of             
Session.  
209. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable exclusive ly by it.  
210. Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case and police investigation in respect of 
the same offence .   
CHAPTER XVII  
THE CHARGE  
A.–Form of charges  
211.  Contents of charge.  
212. Particulars as to time, place and person.  9 
 SECTIONS  
213.  When manner of committing offence must be stated.  
214.  Words in charge taken in sense of law under which offence is punishable.  
215.  Effect of errors.  
216.  Court may alter charge . 
217.  Recall of witnesses when charge altered.  
B.–Joinder of charges  
218.  Separate charges for distinct offences.  
219.  Three offences of same kind within year may be charged together.  
220.  Trial for more than one offence.  
221.  Where it is doubtful what offence has been committed.  
222.  When offence proved included in o ffence charged.  
223. What persons may be charged jointly.  
224.  Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of several charges.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION  
225.  Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor.  
226.  Opening case for prosecution.  
227.  Discharge . 
228.  Framing of charge.  
229.  Conviction on plea of guilty.  
230.  Date for prosecution evidence.  
231.  Evidence for prosecution.  
232.  Acquittal.  
233.  Entering upon defence.  
234.  Arguments.  
235.  Judgment of acquittal or co nviction.  
236.  Previous conviction.  
237.  Procedure in cases instituted under section 199( 2). 
CHAPTER XIX  
TRIAL OF WARRANT -CASES BY MAGISTRATES  
A.–Cases instituted on a police report  
238.  Compliance with section 207.  
239.  When accused shall be discharge d. 
240.  Framing of charge.  
241.  Conviction on plea of guilty.  
242.  Evidence for prosecution.  
243.  Evidence for defence.  10 
 SECTIONS  
B.–Cases instituted otherwise than on police report                      
244. Evidence for prosecution.  
245. When accused s hall be discharged.  
246. Procedure where accused is not discharged.  
247. Evidence for defence.  
C.–Conclusion of trial  
248.  Acquittal or conviction.  
249.  Absence of complainant.  
250.  Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause.  
CHAPTER XX  
TRIAL OF SUMMONS -CASES BY MAGISTRATES  
251.  Substance of accusation to be stated.  
252.  Conviction on plea of guilty.  
253.  Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty cases.  
254.  Procedure when not convicted.  
255.  Acquittal or conviction.  
256.  Non-appearance or death of complainant.  
257.  Withdrawal of complaint.  
258.  Power to stop proceedings in certain cases.  
259.  Power of Court to convert summons -cases into warrant -cases.  
CHAPTER XXI  
SUMMARY TRIALS  
260.  Power to try summarily.  
261.  Summ ary trial by Magistrate of the second class.  
262.  Procedure for summary trials.  
263.  Record in summary trials.  
264.  Judgment in cases tried summarily.  
265.  Language of record and judgment.  
CHAPTER XXIA  
PLEA BARGAINING  
265A. Application of the Chapter.  
265B. Application for plea bargaining.  
265C. Guidelines for mutually satisfactory disposition.  
265D. Report of the mutually satisfactory disposition to be submitted before the Court.  
265E. Disposal of the case.  
265F. Judgment of the Court.  
265G. Finality o f the judgment.  
265H. Power of the Court in plea bargaining.  11 
 SECTIONS  
265-I. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set -off against the sentence of 
imprisonment.  
265J. Savings.  
265K. Statements of accused not to be used.  
265L. Non -application o f the Chapter.  
CHAPTER XXII  
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS  
266.  Definitions.  
267.  Power to require attendance of prisoners.  
268.  Power of State Government to exclude certain persons from operation of section 267.  
269.  Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order in certain contingencies.  
270.  Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody.  
271.  Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
A.–Mode of taking and recording evidence  
272.  Language of Courts.  
273.  Evidence to be taken in presence of accused.  
274.  Record in  summons -cases and inquiries.  
275.  Record in warrant -cases.  
276.  Record in trial before Court of Session.  
277.  Language of record o f evidence.  
278.  Procedure in regard to such evidence when completed.  
279.  Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader.  
280.  Remarks respecting demeanour of witness.  
281.  Record of examination of accused.  
282.  Interpreter to be bound to inter pret truthfully.  
283.  Record in High Court.  
B.–Commissions for the examination of witnesses  
284.  When attendance of witness may be dispensed with and commission issued.  
285.  Commission to whom to be issued.  
286.  Execution of commissions.  
287.  Parties may examine  witnesses.  
288.  Return of commission.  
289.  Adjournment of proceeding.  
290.  Execution of foreign commissions.  
291.  Deposition of medical witness.  
291A. Identification report of Magistrate.  12 
 SECTIONS  
292.  Evidence of officers of the Mint.  
293.  Reports of certain Government scientific experts.  
294.  No formal proof of certain documents.  
295.  Affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants.  
296.  Evidence of formal character on affidavit.  
297.  Authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn.  
298.  Previous conviction or acquittal how proved.  
299.  Record of evidence in absence of accused.  
CHAPTER XXIV  
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
300.  Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same offence . 
301.  Appearance by P ublic Prosecutors . 
302.  Permission to conduct prosecution . 
303.  Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to be defended.  
304.  Legal aid to accused at State expense in  certain cases . 
305.  Procedure when corporation or registered society i s an accused.  
306.  Tender of pardon to accomplice . 
307.  Power to direct tender of pardon . 
308.  Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon . 
309.  Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings . 
310.  Local inspection.  
311.  Power to summon materia l witness,  or examine person present . 
311A. Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatures or handwriting.  
312.  Expenses of complainants and witnesses.  
313.  Power to examine the accused.  
314.  Oral arguments and memorandum of arguments.  
315.  Accused person to be competent witness.  
316.  No influence to be used to induce disclosure.  
317.  Provision for inquiries and trial being held in the absence of accused in certain cases.  
318.  Procedure where accused does not understand proceedings.  
319.  Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence.  
320.  Compounding of offences.  
321.  Withdrawal from prosecution.  
322.  Procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of.  
323.  Procedure when, after commencement of inqui ry or trial, Magistrate finds case should be     
committed.  
324.  Trial of persons previously convicted of offences against coinage, stamp -law or property.  
325.  Procedure when Magistrate cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe.  13 
 SECTIONS  
326.  Conviction or commitment on evidence partly recorded by one Magistrate and partly  by 
another.  
327.  Court to be open . 
CHAPTER XXV  
PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND  
328.  Procedure in case of accused being lunatic . 
329.  Procedure in case of person of u nsound mind tried before Court . 
330.  Release of person of unsound mind pending investigation or trial.  
331.  Resumption of inquiry or trial.  
332.  Procedure on accused appearing before Magistrate or Court.  
333.  When accused appears to have been of sound  mind.  
334.  Judgment of acquittal on ground of unsoundness of mind.  
335.  Person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe custody.  
336.  Power of State Government to empower officer -in-charge to discharge.  
337.  Procedure where lunatic prisoner is r eported capable of making his defence.  
338.  Procedure where lunatic detained is declared fit to be released.  
339.  Delivery of lunatic to care of relative or friend.  
CHAPTER XXVI  
PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE  
340.  Procedure in cases mentioned in section 195.  
341.  Appeal.  
342.  Power to order costs.  
343.  Procedure of Magistrate taking  cognizance.  
344.  Summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence.  
345.  Procedure in certain cases of contempt.  
346. Procedure wh ere Court  considers that case should not be dealt with under section 345.  
347.  When Registrar or Sub -Registrar to be deemed a Civil Court.  
348.  Discharge of offender on submission of apology.  
349.  Imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or produce document.  
350.  Summary procedure for punishment for non -attendance by a witness in obedience to summons.  
351.  Appeals from convictions under sections 344, 345, 349 and 350.  
352.  Certain Judges and Magistrates not to try certain offences when committed before themselves.  
CHAPTER XXVII  
THE JUDGMENT  
353.  Judgment.  
354.  Language and contents of judgment.  
355.  Metropolitan Magistrate's judgment.  14 
 SECTIONS  
356.  Order for notifying address of previously convicted offender.  
357.  Order to pay compe nsation.  
357A. Victim compensation scheme.  
357B. Compensation to be in addition to fine under section 326A or section 376D of Indian Penal Code.  
357C. Treatment of victims.  
358.  Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested.  
359.  Order to pay costs in no n-cognizable cases.  
360.  Order to release on probation of good conduct or after admonition.  
361.  Special reasons to be recorded in  certain cases.  
362.  Court not to alter judgment.  
363.  Copy of judgment to be given to the accused and other persons.  
364.  Judgment when to be translated.  
365.  Court  of Session to send copy of finding and sentence to District Magistrate.  
CHAPTER XXVIII  
SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION  
366.  Sentence of death to be submitted by Court of Session for confirmation . 
367.  Power to direct further inquiry to be made or additional evidence to be taken.  
368.  Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction.  
369.  Confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges.  
370.  Procedure in case of difference o f opinion.  
371.  Procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation . 
CHAPTER XXIX  
APPEALS  
372.  No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided.  
373.  Appeal from orders requiring security or refusal to accept or rejecting surety for keeping peace 
or good behaviour.  
374.  Appeals from convictions.  
375.  No appeal in certain cases when  accused pleads guilty.  
376.  No appeal in  petty cases.  
377.  Appeal by the State Government against sentence.  
378.  Appeal in case of acquittal.  
379.  Appeal against convi ction by High Court in certain cases.  
380.  Special right of appeal in certain cases.  
381.  Appeal to Court of Session how heard.  
382.  Petition of appeal.  
383.  Procedure when appellant in jail.  
384.  Summary dismissal of appeal.  
385.  Procedure for heari ng appeals not dismissed summarily.  
386.  Powers of the Appellate Court.  
387.  Judgments of Subordinate Appellate Court.  
388.  Order of High Court on appeal to be certified to lower Court.  15 
 SECTIONS  
389.  Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release o f appellant on bail.  
390.  Arrest of accused in  appeal from acquittal.  
391.  Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken.  
392.  Procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally divided.  
393.  Finality of judgments and orders on appeal.  
394.  Abatement of appeals.  
CHAPTER XXX  
REFERENCE AND REVISION  
395.  Reference to High Court.  
396.  Disposal of case according to decision of High Court.  
397.  Calling for records to exercise powers of revision.  
398.  Power to order inquiry.  
399.  Sessions Judge's powers of revision.  
400.  Power of Additional Sessions Judge.  
401.  High Court's powers of revision.  
402.  Power of High Court to withdraw or transfer revision cases.  
403.  Option of Court to hear parties.  
404.  Statement by Metropolitan M agistrate of ground of his decision to be considered by High Court.  
405.  High Court's order to be certified to lower Court.  
CHAPTER XXXI  
TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES  
406.  Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals.  
407.  Power of High Court to tr ansfer cases and appeals.  
408.  Power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals.  
409.  Withdrawal of cases and appeals by  Sessions Judges.  
410.  Withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrate.  
411.  Making over or withdrawal of cases by Executive Magistr ates. 
412.  Reasons to be recorded.  
CHAPTER XXXII  
EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES  
A.–Death Sentences  
413.  Execution of order passed under section 368.  
414.  Execution of sentence of death passed by High Court.  
415.  Postponem ent of execution of sentence of death in case of appeal to Supreme Court.  
416.  Postponement of capital sentence on pregnant woman.  16 
 SECTIONS  
B.–Imprisonment  
417.  Power to appoint place of imprisonment.  
418.  Execution of sentence of imprisonment.  
419.  Direction of warrant for execution.  
420.  Warrant with whom to be lodged.  
C.–Levy of fine  
421.  Warrant for levy of fine.  
422.  Effect of such warrant.  
423.  Warrant for levy of fine issued by a Court in any territory to which this Code does not extend.  
424.  Suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment.  
D.–General provisions regarding execution  
425.  Who may issue warrant.  
426.  Sentence  on escaped convict when to take effect.  
427.  Sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence.  
428.  Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of 
imprisonment.  
429.  Saving.  
430.  Return of warrant on execution of sentence.  
431.  Money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine.  
E.–Suspension, remission and commutation of sentences  
432.  Power to suspend or remit sentences.  
433.  Power to commute sentence.  
433A. Restriction on powers of remission or commutation in certain cases.  
434.  Concurrent power of Central Government in case of death sentences.  
435.  State Government to act after  consultation with Central Government in certain cases.  
CHAPTER XXXIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS  
436.  In what cases bail to be taken.  
436A. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained.  
437.  When bail may be taken in case of non -bailable offence.  
437A. Bail to require accused to appear before next appellate Court.  
438.  Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.  
439.  Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail.  
440.  Amount of bond  and reduction thereof.  
441.  Bond of accused and sureties.  
441A. Declaration by sureties.  
442.  Discharge from custody.  17 
 SECTIONS  
443.  Power to order sufficient bail when that first taken is insufficient.  
444.  Discharge of sureties.  
445.  Deposit instead  of recognizance.  
446.  Procedure when bond has been forfeited.  
446A. Cancellation of bond and bail bond.  
447.  Procedure in case of insolvency of death of surety or when a bond is forfeited.  
448.  Bond required from minor.  
449.  Appeal from orders under s ection 446.  
450.  Power to direct levy of amount due on certain recognizances.  
CHAPTER XXXIV  
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY  
451.  Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial in certain cases.  
452.  Order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial.  
453.  Payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused.  
454.  Appeal against orders under section 452 or section 453.  
455.  Destruction of libellous and other matter.  
456.  Power to restore possession of immovable property.  
457.  Procedure by police  upon seizure of property.  
458.  Procedure whe re no claimant appears within six months.  
459.  Power to  sell perishable property.  
CHAPTER XXXV  
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS  
460.  Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings.  
461.  Irregularities which vitiate pr oceedings.  
462.  Proceedings in wrong place.  
463.  Non-compliance with provisions of section 164 or section 281.  
464.  Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge.  
465.  Finding or sentence when  reversible by reason of error , omission o r irregularity.  
466.  Defect or error not to make attachment unlawful.  18 
 CHAPTER XXXVI  
LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES  
SECTIONS  
467.  Definitions.  
468.  Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation.  
469.  Commencement  of the period of limitation.  
470.  Exclusion of time in certain cases.  
471.  Exclusion of date on which Court is closed.  
472.  Continuing offence.  
473.  Extension of period of limitation in  certain cases.  
CHAPTER XXXVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
474.  Trials before High Courts.  
475.  Delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be tried by Court -martial.  
476.  Forms.  
477.  Power of High Court to make rules.  
478.  Power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrate in certain cases.  
479.  Case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested.  
480.  Practising pleader not to sit as Magistrate in certain Courts.  
481.  Public servant concerned in sale not to purchase or bid for property.  
482.  Saving of inherent power of High Court.  
483.  Duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence over Courts of Judicial Magistrates.  
484.  Repeal and savings.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. –CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. –FORMS.  
FORM NO. 1. —Summons to an accused person . 
FORM NO. 2 .—Warrant of arrest . 
FORM NO. 3 .—Bond and bail -bond after arrest under a warrant . 
FORM NO. 4 .—Proclamation requiring the appearance of a person accused . 
FORM NO. 5 .—Proclamation requiring the attendance of a witness . 
FORM NO. 6 .—Order of attachment to compel the attendance of  a witness . 
FORM NO. 7 .—Order of attachment to compel the appearance of a person accused . 
FORM NO. 8 .—Order authorising an attachment by the District Magistrate or Collector . 
FORM NO. 9 .—Warrant in the first instance to bring up a witness . 
FORM NO. 10 .—Warrant to search after information of a particular offence . 
FORM NO. 11 .—Warrant to search suspected place of deposit.  19 
 FORM NO. 12 .—Bond to keep the peace.  
FORM NO. 13 .—Bond for good behaviour.  
FORM NO. 14 .—Summons on information of a probable breach of the peace.  
FORM NO. 15 .—Warrant of commitment on failure to find security to keep the peace.  
FORM NO. 16 .—Warrant of commitment on failure to find security  for good behaviour.  
FORM NO. 17 .—Warrant to discharge a person imprisoned on failure to give security.  
FORM NO. 18 .—Warrant of imprisonment on failure to pay maintenance.  
FORM NO. 19 .—Warrant to enforce the payment of maintenance by attachment and sale. 
FORM NO. 20 .—Order for the removal of nuisances.  
FORM NO. 21 .—Magistrate’s notice and peremptory order.  
FORM NO. 22 .—Injunction to provide against imminent danger pending inquiry.  
FORM NO. 23 .—Magistrate’s order prohibiting the repetition, etc., of a nuisance.  
FORM NO. 24 .—Magistrate’s order to prevent obstruction, riot, etc.  
FORM NO. 25 .—Magistrate’s order de claring party entitled to retain possession of land, 
etc., in dispute.  
FORM NO. 26 .—Warrant of attachment in the case of a dispute as to the possession of 
land, etc.  
FORM NO. 27 .—Magistrate’s order prohibiting the doing of anything on land or water.  
FORM N O. 28 .—Bond and bail -bond on a preliminary inquiry before a Police Officer.  
FORM NO. 29 .—Bond to prosecute or give evidence.  
FORM NO. 30 .—Special summons to a person accused of a petty offence.  
FORM NO. 31 .—Notice of commitment by Magistrate to Public Prosecutor.  
FORM NO. 32 .—Charges.  
I. Charges with one -head.  
II. Charges with two or more heads.  
III. Charges for theft after previous conviction.  
FORM NO. 33 .—Summons to witness.  
FORM NO. 34 .—Warrant of commitment on a sentence of imprisonment or fine if passe d 
by a Court. 
FORM NO. 35 .—Warrant of imprisonment on failure to pay compensation.  
FORM NO. 36 .—Order requiring production in Court of person in prison for answering to 
charge of offence.  
FORM NO.  37.—Order requiring production in Court of person in prison  for giving 
evidence.  
FORM NO. 38 .—Warrant of commitment in certain cases of co ntempt when a fine is 
imposed.  
FORM NO. 39 .—Magistrate’s or Judge’s warrant of commitment of witness refusing to 
answer or to produce document.  
FORM NO. 40 .—Warrant of commitmen t under sentence of death.  
FORM NO. 41 .—Warrant after a commutation of a sentence.  
FORM NO. 42 .—Warrant of execution of a sentence of death.  20 
 FORM NO. 43 .—Warrant to levy a fine by attachment and Sale. 
FORM NO. 44 .—Warrant for recovery of fine.  
FORM NO. 44A .—Bond for appearance of offender released pending realis ation of fine.  
FORM NO. 45 .—Bond and bail -bond for attendance before officer in charge of police 
station or Court. 
FORM NO. 46 .—Warrant to discharge a person imprisoned on failure to give security.  
FORM NO. 47 .—Warrant of attachment to enforce a bond.  
FORM NO. 48 .—Notice to surety on breach of a bond.  
FORM NO. 49 .—Notice to surety of forfeiture of bond for good behavio ur. 
FORM NO. 50 .—Warrant of attachment against a surety.  
FORM NO. 51 .—Warrant of com mitment of the surety of an accused person admitted to 
bail. 
FORM NO. 52 .—Notice to the principal of forfeiture of bond to keep the peace.  
FORM NO. 53 .—Warrant to attach the property of the principal on breach of a bond to 
keep the peace.  
FORM NO. 54 .—Warr ant of imprisonment on breach of a bond to keep the peace . 
FORM NO. 55 .—Warrant of attachment and sale on forfeiture of bond for good behaviour.  
FORM NO. 56 .—Warrant of imprisonment on forfeiture of bond for good behavio ur. 
APPENDIX I. —[Extracts from the C ode of  Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005  (25 of 
2005) .]  
  
21 
 THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973  
ACT N O. 2 OF 1974  
[25th January, 1974. ] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Criminal Procedure.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the twenty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***: 
Provided that the provisions of th is Code, other than those relating to Chapters VIII, X and XI 
thereof, shall not apply — 
(a) to the State of Nagaland,  
(b) to the tribal areas,  
but the concerned State Government may, by notification, apply such provisions or any of them to the 
whole or par t of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be, with such supplemental, 
incidental or consequential modifications, as may be specified in the notification.  
Explanation .—In this section, “tribal areas ” means the territories which immedi ately before the 21st 
day of January, 1972, were included in the tribal areas of Assam, as referred to in paragraph 20 of the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, other than those within the local limits of the municipality of Shillong.  
(3) It shall come in to force on the 1st day of April, 1974.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
In the Code of Criminal Procedure (Haryana Amendment) Act, 2014, -In section 1, after figures 
“2014”, the words “as extended to the Union territory of Chandigarh” shall be inserted;  
 
[Vide Notification No. GSR929(E) dated 16th December, 2019.]  
Manipur  
In the Code of Criminal Procedure (Manipur Amendment) Act, 1982 (Manipur Act No. 3 of 1983), hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act, for the sub -section (3) of section 1, the following shall be substituted, namely,  — 
 
“(3) It shall come into force, on its publication in the official Gazette, in such area of the State of Manipur and 
shall remain in force during such period as the notification issued under section 3 of the Armed Forces (Special  
Powers) Act, 1958 declaring that area to be a disturbed area shall be in operation, but its expiry under the operation 
of this sub -section shall not affect -- 
 
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under, this act, or  
 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accured or incurred under this Act, or  
 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence under this Act, or  
 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of a ny such right, privilege, obligation, 
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,  
                                                 
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                               
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  22 
  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced any such penalty, 
forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not expired.".  
[Vide Manipur Act 10 of 1983, s. 2]  
2. Definitions .—In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “bailable offence ” means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First Schedule, or 
which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and “non-bailable offence ” 
means any other offence;  
(b) “charge ” includes any head of charge when the charge contains more heads than one;  
(c) “cognizable offence ” means an offence for which, and “cognizable case ” means a case in 
which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for the time 
being in force, arrest without warrant;  
(d) “complaint ” means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate, with a view to h is 
taking action under this Code, that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an 
offence, but does not include a police report.  
Explanation .—A report made by a police officer in a case which discloses, after investigation, the 
commission of a  non-cognizable offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police officer by 
whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant;  
(e) “High Court ” means, — 
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State;  
(ii) in relation to a  Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High Court for a State has 
been extended by law, that High Court;  
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest Court of criminal appeal for that  
territory other than the Supreme Court of Ind ia; 
(f) “India ” means the territories to which this Code extends;  
(g) “inquiry ” means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Code by a Magistrate 
or Court;  
(h) “investigation ” includes all the proceedings under this Code for the collection  of evidence 
conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a Magistrate) who is authorised by a 
Magistrate in this behalf;  
(i) “judicial proceeding ” includes any proceeding in the course of which evidence is or may be 
legally taken on oath;  
(j) “local jurisdiction ”, in relation to a Court or Magistrate, means the local area within which the 
Court or Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his powers under this Code 1[and such local area 
may comprise the whole of the State, or any part of t he State, as the State Government may, by 
notification, specify];  
(k) “metropolitan area ” means the area declared, or deemed to be declared, under section 8, to be 
a metropolitan area;  
(l) “non-cognizable offence ” means an offence for which, and “non-cogni zable case ” means a 
case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without warrant;  
(m) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(n) “offence ” means any act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being  in force 
and includes any act in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the Cattle -
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  23 
 trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871);  
(o) “officer in charge of a police station ” includes, when the officer in charge of the police station 
is absent from the station -house or unable from illness or other cause to perform his duties, the police 
officer present at the station -house who is next in rank to such officer and is above the rank of 
constable or, when the State Government so directs, any other police  officer so present;  
(p) “place ” includes a house, building, tent, vehicle and vessel;  
(q) “pleader ”, when used with reference to any proceeding in any Court, means a person 
authorised by or under any law for the time being in force, to practise in such Co urt, and includes any 
other person appointed with the permission of the Court to act in such proceeding;  
(r) “police report ” means a report forwarded by a police officer to a Magistrate under                            
sub-section ( 2) of section 173;  
(s) “police station ” means any post or place declared generally or specially by the State 
Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area specified by the State Government in 
this behalf;  
(t) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this  Code;  
(u) “Public Prosecutor ” means any person appointed under section 24, and includes any person 
acting under the directions of a Public Prosecutor;  
(v) “sub-division ” means a sub -division of a district;  
(w) “summons -case” means a case relating to an of fence, and not being a warrant -case;  
1[(wa) “victim ” means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by reason of the act or 
omission for which the accused  person has been charged  and the expression “victim ” includes his or 
her guardian or lega l heir;]  
(x) “warrant -case” means a case relating to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for 
life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years;  
(y) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian Penal Code                 
(45 of 1860) have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
In section 2, for the words “State of Haryana”, the words “Union territory of Chandigarh” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Notification No. GSR929(E) dat ed 16th December, 2019.]  
Manipur  
In section 2 of the principal Act, the clauses (a) and (b) shall be re -arranged as follows, namely, -- 
“(a) to such class or category of the members of the Forces charged with the maintained of public order, or  
(b) to such c lass or category of other public servants (not being persons to whom the provisions of                  
sub-section (1) apply) charged with the maintenance of public order,  
as may be specified in the notification, wherever they may be serving, and thereupo n the provisions of that                 
sub-section shall apply as if for the expression Central Government’ occurring therein, the expression 'Central 
Government' occurring therein, the expression 'State Government' were substituted.".  
[Vide Manipur Act 10 of 1983, s. 3]  
3. Construction of references .—(1) In this Code, — 
(a) any reference, without any qualifying words, to a Magistrate, shall be construed, unless the 
context otherwi se requires, — 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  2 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  24 
 (i) in relation to an area outside a metropolitan area, as a r eference to a Judicial Magistrate;  
(ii) in relation to a metropolitan area, as a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate;    
(b) any reference to a Magistrate of the second class shall, in relation to an area outside a 
metropolitan area, be construed as a re ference to a Judicial Magistrate of the second class, and, in 
relation to a metropolitan area, as a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate;  
(c)  any reference to a Magistrate of the first class shall, — 
(i) in relation to a metropolitan area, be construed a s a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate 
exercising jurisdiction in that area;  
(ii) in relation to any other area, be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class exercising jurisdiction in that area;  
(d) any reference to the Chie f Judicial Magistrate shall, in relation to a metropolitan area, be 
construed as a reference to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in that area.  
(2) In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, any reference to the Court of a  Judicial 
Magistrate shall, in relation to a metropolitan area, be construed as a reference to the Court of the 
Metropolitan Magistrate for that area.  
(3) Unless the context otherwise requires, any reference in any enactment passed before the 
commencement of this Code, — 
(a) to a Magistrate of the first class, shall be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of 
the first class;  
(b) to a Magistrate of the second class or of the third class, shall be construed as a reference to a 
Judicial Magistrate of the second class;  
(c) to a Presidency Magistrate or Chief Presidency Magistrate, shall be construed as a reference, 
respectively, to a Metropolitan Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate;  
(d) to any area which is included in a Metropolitan area , as a reference to such metropolitan area, 
and any reference to a Magistrate of the first class or of the second class in relation to such area, shall 
be construed as a reference to the Metropolitan Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in such area.  
(4) Whe re, under any law, other than this Code, the function exercisable by a Magistrate relate to 
matters, — 
(a) which involve the appreciation or sifting of evidence or the formulation of any decision which 
exposes any person to any punishment or penalty or dete ntion in custody pending investigation, 
inquiry or trial or would have the effect of sending him for trial before any Court, they shall, subject 
to the provisions of this Code, be exercisable by a Judicial Magistrate; or  
(b) which are administrative or exe cutive in nature, such as, the granting of a licence, the 
suspension or cancellation of a licence, sanctioning a prosecution or withdrawing from a prosecution, 
they shall, subject as aforesaid, be exercisable by an Executive Magistrate.   
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep   
Insertion of New section 3A.  —In the Code, as it applies to the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands, after section 3, the following section shall be inserted , namely: —  
“3A. Special provision relating to Andaman and Nicobar Islands . —(1) Reference in t his Code to — 
(a) The Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be construed as references to the District   Magistrate or, where 
the State Government so directs, also to th e Additional District Magistrate;  25 
 (b) a  Magistrate or   Magistrate of the first class or of the second class or Judicial  Magistrate of the first 
class or of the second class, shall be construed as references to such Executive Magistrate as the State 
Govern ment  may, be notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(2) The State Government may, if it is of opinion that adequate number of persons are available for 
appointment as Judicial Magistrate, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the pr ovisions of this 
section shall, on and from such day as may  be specified in the notification, cease to be in force and different 
dates may be specified for different islands.  
(3) On the cesser of operation of the provisions of this section , every inquiry o r trial pending, immediately 
before such cesser, before the District  Magistrate or Additional District  Magistrate or any Executive 
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall stand transferred, and shall be dealt with, from the stage which was reached 
before, such cesser, by such Judicial Magistrate as the State Government may specify in this behalf. ”. 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974  Act (1 of 1974 ), s. 3 ] 
4. Trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and other laws .—(1) All  offences under the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with 
according to the pr ovisions hereinafter contained.  
(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, an d otherwise dealt 
with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating 
the manner of place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
 
Manipur  
In section 4 of the principal Act, the clauses (a) and (b) shall be re -arranged as follows, namely: -- 
"(a) to such class or category of the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of 
public order, or  
(b) to such class or category of other public se rvants of the Forces persons to whom the 
provisions of sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) apply) charged with the maintenance or public order, 
as may be specified in the notification, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions 
of sub -sectio n (2) shall apply as if for the expression ‘Central Government’ occurring therein, the 
expression, 'State Government' were substituted.".  
[Vide Manipur Act 10 of 1983, s. 4]  
Manipur  
In relation to trial of the offences specified in clause (a) of sub -sectio n (1) of section 4 of this Act, any reference 
to a Magistrate in Chapters XIX and XX of the Code shall be construed as reference to a Specified Execution 
Magistrate and the expression “Any Magistrate in the Sixth Column of the First Schedule to the Code sh all include 
Specified Executive Magistrate.  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and The Schedule]  
5. Saving .—Nothing contained in this Code shall, in the absence of a specific provision to the 
contrary, affect any special or local law for the time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or power 
conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other law for the time being in force.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Manipur  
In section 5 of the principal Act, -- 
(i) in between the figures and commas "396," a nd "399," , the figures and comma "397," shall be inserted;  
(ii) in between the words “or” and “Session”, the words “the Court of” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Manipur 10 of 1983, s. 5]  26 
 CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES  
6. Classes of Crimi nal Courts .—Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law, 
other than this Code, there shall be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts, namely: — 
(i) Courts of Session;  
(ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class and, in any metropolitan area, Metropolitan Magistrates;  
(iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class; and  
(iv) Executive Magistrates.  
7. Territorial divisions .—(1) Every State shall be a sessions division or shall consist of sessions 
divisions; and every ses sions divisions shall, for the purposes of this Code, be a district or consist of 
districts:  
Provided that every metropolitan area shall, for the said purposes, be a separate sessions division and 
district.  
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, alter the limits or the number 
of such divisions and districts.  
(3) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, divide any district into sub -
divisions and may alter the limits or the number of such sub -divisions.  
(4) The sessions divisions, districts and sub -divisions existing in a State at the commencement of this 
Code, shall be deemed to have been formed under this section.  
8. Metropolitan areas .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, declare that, as fro m such 
date as may be specified in the notification, any area in the State comprising a city or town whose 
population exceeds one million shall be a metropolitan area for the purposes of this Code.  
(2) As from the commencement of this Code, each of the Pre sidency -towns of Bombay, Calcutta and 
Madras and the city of Ahmedabad shall be deemed to be declared under sub -section ( 1) to be a 
metropolitan area.  
(3) The State Government may, by notification, extend, reduce or alter the limits of a metropolitan 
area but the reduction  or alteration shall not be so made as to reduce the population of such area to less 
than one million.  
(4) Where, after an area has been declared , or deemed to have been declared to be, a metropolitan 
area, the population of such area fal ls below one million, such area shall, on and from such date as the 
State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, cease to be a metropolitan area; but 
notwithstanding such cesser, any inquiry, trial or appeal pending immediately before suc h cesser before 
any Court or Magistrate in such area shall continue to be dealt with under this Code, as if such cesser had 
not taken place.  
(5) Where the State Government reduces or alters, under sub -section ( 3), the limits of any 
metropolitan area, such   reduction  or  alteration  shall  not  affect  any inquiry,   trial  or  appeal  pending  
immediately  before such  reduction or alteration before any Court or Magistrate, and every such inquiry, 
trial or appeal shall continue to be dealt with under this Cod e as if such reduction or alteration had not 
taken place.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “population ” means the population as 
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Delhi 
In its application to the National Capital Territory of Delhi, in section 8,— 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “a cit y or town”, substitute  “a city or town or part thereof”;  
(b) for sub -section ( 3), substitute the following sub -section, namely: — 27 
 “(3) The State Government may, by notification divide a metropolitan area into two or more such 
areas or extend or reduce or alter the limits of a metropolitan area:  
Provided that — 
(a) the division of metropolitan area shall not be so made as to result in the pop ulation of any of the 
areas into which it has been divided being less than one million; and  
(b) the reduction or alteration of metropolitan area shall not be so made as to reduce the population 
of such area to less than one million. ”; 
(c) after sub -section  (4), insert the  following sub -section , namely: — 
“(4-A) Where any metropolitan area is divided under sub -section ( 3), the High Court may issue 
such directions as it deems fit with respect to the disposal of the proceedings pending s immediately 
before such  division before any Magistrate or court having jurisdi ction in respect of such area.”  
[Vide Delhi Act 9 of 2011, s. 2]  
9. Court of Session .—(1) The State Government shall establish a Court of Session for every sessions 
division.  
(2) Every Court of Sessio n shall be presided over by a Judge, to be appointed by the High Court.  
(3) The High Court may also appoint Additional Sessions Judges and Assistant Session Judges to 
exercise jurisdiction in a Court of Session.  
(4) The Sessions Judge of one sessions divis ion may be appointed by the High Court to be also an 
Additional Sessions Judge of another division, and in such case he may sit for the disposal of cases at 
such place or places in the other division as the High Court may direct.  
(5) Where the office of th e Sessions Judge is vacant, the High Court may make arrangements for the 
disposal of any urgent application which is, or may be, made or pending before such Court of Session by 
an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, or, if there be no Additional or Ass istant Sessions Judge, by a 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, in the sessions division; and every such Judge or Magistrate shall have 
jurisdiction to deal with any such application.  
(6) The Court of Session shall ordinarily hold its sitting at such place or place s as the High Court 
may, by notification, specify; but, if, in any particular case, the Court of Session is of opinion that it will 
tend to the general convenience of the parties and witnesses to hold its sittings at any other place in the 
sessions divisio n, it may, with the consent of the prosecution and the accused, sit at that place for the 
disposal of the case or the examination of any witness or witnesses therein.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Code, “appointment ” does not include the first appo intment, 
posting or promotion of a person by the Government to any Service, or post in connection with the affairs of 
the Union or of a State, where under any law, such appointment, posting or promotion is required to be 
made by Government.  28 
 STATE AMENDMEN T 
West Bengal .— 
To sub-section ( 3) of section 9 of the principal Act, the following provisos shall be added: — 
Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code,  an Additional Sessions 
Judge in a sub -division, other than the sub -division, by whatever name called, wherein the headquarters of 
the Sessions Judges are situated, exercising jurisdiction in a Court of Session, shall have all the powers of 
the Sessions Judge under this Code, in respect of the cases and proceedings in the Criminal Courts in that 
sub-division, for the purposes of sub -section ( 7) of session 116 , sections 193 and 194,  clause ( a) of 
section 209 and sections 409, 439 and 449:  
Provided further that the above powers shall not be in derogation of the powers otherwi se exercisable 
by an Additional Sessions Judge or a Sessions Judge under this Code. ”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act,  24 of 1988, s. 3. ] 
Orissa  
Amendment of section 9 .-In Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), to sub -section (3), the following provisions shall be added, 
namely: — 
       “Provided that  notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, an Additional 
Sessions Judge in a district or subdivision, other than the district  or subdivision, by whatever name called, 
wherein  the headquarters of the Sessions Judge are situated, exercising jurisdiction in a Court of Sessions 
shall have all the powers of the Sessions Judge under this  Code, in respect of the cases and the 
proceed ings in the Criminal Courts in that district or subdivision for the purposes of sub -section (7) of 
section 116, sections 193 and 194, clause (a) of section 209 and sections 409 and 449:  
 Provided further that the above powers shall be not be in derogation of the powers otherwise 
exercisable by an Additional Sessions Judge or  a Sessions Judge under this Code.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 2004, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 9 of Act 2 of 1974. —In section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
herein after referred to as the said Code, in sub -section (6), the following proviso shall be inserted,  
namely: — 
“Provided that the Court of Session may hold, or the High Court may direct the Court of session 
to hold, its sitting in any particular case at any pl ace in the session division, where it appears 
expedient to do so for consideration of internal security or public order, and in such cases, the consent 
of the prosecution and the accused shall not be necessary.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
 In section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 hereinafter referred to the said Code, after sub -
section (5), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely ;  
 “(5-A)  In the event of the death, resignation, removal or transfer of th e Sessions Judge, or of his being 
incapacitated by illness or otherwise for the performance of his duties, or of his absence from the place at 
which his court is held, the senior -most among the Additional Sessions Judges, and the Assistant sessions 
Judges present at the place, and in their absence the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall without relinquishing 
his ordinary duties, assume charge of the office of the Sessions Judge and continue in charge thereof until 
the officer is resumed by the Sessions Judge or  assumed by an officer appointed thereto, and shall subject 29 
 to the provision of this Code and any rules made by the High Court in this behalf, exercise any of the 
powers of the Sessions Judge. ”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 2]  
10. Subordination of  Assistant Sessions Judges. —(1) All Assistant Sessions Judges shall be 
subordinate to the Sessions Judge in whose Court they exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) The Sessions Judge may, from time to time, make rules consistent with this Code, as to the 
distribution of business among such Assistant Sessions Judges.  
(3) The Sessions Judge may also make provision for the disposal of any urgent application, in the 
event of his absence or inability to act, by an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, or, if there be no 
Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and every such Judge or 
Magistrate shall be deemed to have jurisdiction to deal with any such application.  
11. Courts of Judicial Magistrates. —(1) In every district (not being a metro politan area) there shall 
be established as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class and of the second class, and at such 
places, as the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify:  
1[Provided that t he State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, establish, for any 
local area, one or more Special Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class or of the second class to try 
any particular case or particular class of cases, and where any such Special Court is established, no other 
Court of Magistrate in the local area shall have jurisdiction to try any case or class of cases for the trial of 
which such Special Court of Judicial Magistrate has been established.]  
(2) The presiding office rs of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court.  
(3) The High Court may, whenever it appears to it to be expedient or necessary, confer the powers of  
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class on any member of the Judicial Serv ice of the 
State, functioning as a Judge in a Civil Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
In the Code, as it applies to the Union Territories to which this regulation extends, in sub-section (3) of 
section 11, for the words “any member of the judicial service of the state functioning as a judge in a civil 
court ”, the words “any person discharging the functions of a civil court ”, shall be substituted.  
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedu re (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 4] 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 11. — In section 11 of the said Code, after sub -section (1) the following sub -
section shall be inserted and be deemed always to have been inserted, namely : — 
“(1-A) Th e State Government may like -wise establish as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates of 
the first class and of the second class in respect to particular cases, or to a particular class or particular 
classes of cases; or in regard to cases, generally, in any l ocal area.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 3] 
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 11. — After sub -section ( 3) of Section 11 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) (hereinafter referred to as the said Code) the following sub -section shall be  inserted and 
shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely :— 
                                                 
1. Added by Act 45 of 1978, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 8-12-1978).  30 
 “(4) The State Government may likewise establish for any local area one or more courts of  Judicial 
Magistrate of the First Class or Second Class to try any particular cases or particular  class  or categories of 
cases. ” 
[Vide Bihar Act 8 of 1977, s. 2]  
12. Chief Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, etc. —(1) In every 
district (not being a metropolitan area), the High Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the first c lass 
to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(2) The High Court may appoint any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to be an Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have all or any of the powers of a Chief Judicial Magistrate 
under this Code or under any other law for the time being in forc e as the High Court may direct.  
(3) (a) The High Court may designate any Judicial Magistrate of the first class in any sub -division as 
the Sub -divisional Judicial Magistrate and relieve him of the responsibilities specified in this section as 
occasion requires.  
(b) Subject to the general control of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, every Sub -divisional Judicial 
Magistrate shall also have and exercise, such powers of supervision and control over the wor k of the 
Judicial Magistrates (other than Additional Chief Judicial Magistrates) in the sub -division as the High 
Court may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 12 of the said Code, after  sub-section  (3), the following sub -section shall be  inserted,  
namely ;  
“(4) Where the Office of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is vacant or he is incapacitated by illness, 
absence or otherwise for the performance of his duties, the senior -most among the Additional Chi ef 
Judicial Magistrate and other Judicial Magistrate present at the place, and in their absence the District 
Magistrates present at the place, and in their absence the District Magistrate and in his absence the 
senior -most Executive Magistrate shall dispos e of the urgent work of the Chief Judicial Magistrate.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 3]  
13. Special Judicial Magistrates. —(1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State 
Government so to do, confer upon any person who holds or has hel d any post under the Government, all 
or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Code on a Judicial Magistrate 1[of the first 
class or of the second class, in respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases, in any local 
area, not being a metropolitan area:]  
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses such qualification or 
experience in relation to legal affairs as the High Court may, by rules, specify.  
(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial Magistrates and shall be appointed for such term, 
not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special order, direct.  
2[(3) The High Court may empower a Special Judicial Magistrate to exercise the powers of a 
Metr opolitan Magistrate in relation to any metropolitan area outside his local jurisdiction.]  
 
 
                                                 
1.  Subs. Act 45 of 1978, s. 4, for certain wo rds (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2.  Ins. by  s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  31 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
For section 13 of the Code, the following shall be substituted, namely: — 
“13. (1) The State Government may appoint as may persons as it thinks  fit to be sub  divisional 
Magistrates in any district in the State of Assam.  
(2) The State Government, or subject to the control of the State Government, the District Magistrate 
may place one or more Sub  divisional Magistrates in charge of a subdivision ”. 
[Vide Assam Act 13 of 1964, s. 2 .] 
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 13. — in Sub -section ( 1) of section 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) in its application to the State of Himachal Pradesh for the words “in any district” the 
word s “in any local area” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 40 of 1976, s. 2.]  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 13, Act (2 of 1974) .-In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter 
referred to as the Principal Act) in secti on 13, in sub -section (2) for the words “not exceeding one year at 
a time” the words “not exceeding two years at a time” shall be substituted and to the said sub -section the 
following proviso, shall be added, namely: - 
“Provided that any person who is holdi ng the office of Special Judicial Magistrate at the 
commencement  of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Andhra Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1992 and has not 
completed sixty five years of age shall continue to hold office for a term of two years from the date of his  
appointment”.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 2 of 1992, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 13 .—In section 13 of said Code, for the words “second -class” the words 
“first or second -class” shall be substituted and for the words “in any district”, the words “ in any local 
area” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttara Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 4]  
Bihar  
 Amendment of Section 13 .— In Section 13 of the said Code for the word “in any district” the words 
“in any local area” shall be  substituted  and shall be deemed to hav e been always  substituted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 8 of 1977, s. 3]  
14. Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates. —(1) Subject to the control of the High Court, the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within whic h the 
Magistrates appointed under section 11 or under section 13 may exercise all or any of the powers with 
which they may respectively be invested under this Code:  
1[Provided that the Court of Special Judicial Magistrate may hold its sitting at any place within the 
local area for which it is established.]  
(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of every such 
Magistrate shall extend throughout the district.  
2[(3) Where the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate, appointe d under section 11 or section 13 or section 
18, extends to an area beyond the district, or the metropolitan area, as the case may be, in which he 
                                                 
1.  Added by  Act 45 of 1978 ,  s. 5, (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2.  Ins. by  s. 5, ibid., (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  32 
 ordinarily holds Court, any reference in this Code to the Court of Session, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall, in relation to such Magistrate, throughout the area within his local 
jurisdiction, be construed, unless the context otherwise requires, as a reference to the Court of Session, 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, or Chief Metropol itan Magistrate, as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction in 
relation to the said district or metropolitan area.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Insertion of section 14A in Act 2 of 1974 .—after section 14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974 ), in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as “the said 
Code”), the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
14A. Investing Judicial Magistrates with jurisdiction in specified cases or local area .—The High 
Court may inv est any Judicial Magistrate with all or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or 
under this Code upon a Judicial Magistrate in respect to particular cases or to a particular class or classes 
of cases or in regard to cases generally in any local are a consisting of all or any of the districts specified 
by it in this behalf.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 23 of 1976, s. 2]  
15. Subordination of Judicial Magistrates. —(1) Every Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be 
subordinate to the Sessions Judge; and every other J udicial Magistrate shall, subject to the general control 
of the Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders, consistent 
with this Code, as to t he distribution of business among the Judicial Magistrates subordinate to him.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 15 .—After sub -section (2) of Section 15 of the said Code  the following         
sub-section shall be  substituted  and shall be deemed al ways to have been  substituted,  namely: — 
“(3) Any Judicial Magistrate exercising powers over any local area extending beyond the district in  
which he holds his court shall be subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the said district  and 
reference i n the Code to the Sessions Judge shall be deemed to be reference to the  Sessions Judge of that 
district where he holds his court. ” 
[Vide Bihar  Act 8 of 19 77, s. 4] 
16. Courts of Metropolitan Magistrates. —(1) In every metropolitan area, there shall be estab lished 
as many Courts of Metropolitan Magistrates, and at such places, as the State Government may, after 
consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify.  
(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court.  
(3) The j urisdiction and powers of every Metropolitan Magistrate shall extend throughout the 
metropolitan area.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 16 of the said Code, after sub-section (3), the following sub -section shall be inserted,  
namely : — 
“(4) Where th e Office of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate is vacant or he is incapacitated by illness, 
absence or otherwise for the performance of his duties, the senior -most among the Additional Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate and other Metropolitan Magistrate present at the place, shall dispose of the 
urgent work of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 4]  33 
 17. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate. —(1) The High 
Court shall, in relation to every me tropolitan area within its local jurisdiction, appoint a Metropolitan 
Magistrate to be the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for such metropolitan area.  
(2) The High Court may appoint any Metropolitan Magistrate to be an Additional Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrat e, and such Magistrate shall have all or any of the powers of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 
under this Code or under any other law for the time being in force as the High Court may direct . 
18. Special Metropolitan Magistrates. —(1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State 
Government so to do, confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all 
or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Code on a Metropolitan Magistrate, in 
respect to particula r cases or to particular classes of cases 1*** , in any metropolitan area within its local 
jurisdiction:  
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses such qualification or 
experience in relation to legal affairs as the Hig h Court may, by rules, specify.  
(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Metropolitan Magistrates and shall be appointed for such 
term, not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special order, direct.  
2[(3) The High Court o r the State Government, as the case may be, may empower any Special Metropolitan 
Magistrate to exercise, in any local area outside the metropolitan area, the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 18 .- In section 18 of the Principal Act, in sub -section ( 2) for the words “not 
exceeding one year at a time,” the words “not exceeding two year at a time,” the words “not exceeding 
two years at a time” shall be substituted and to the s aid sub -section the following proviso shall be added, 
namely: - 
“Provided that a person who is holding the office of Special Metropolitan Magistrate at the 
commencement of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Andhra Pradesh  Amendment) Act, 1992, and has not 
comp leted sixty five years of age shall continue t o hold office for a term of two years from the date of his 
appointment”.  
[Vide the Andhra Pradesh Act 2 of 1992, s. 3]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 18 .—In section 18 of the said Code, in sub -section (1), f or the words “in any 
metropolitan area” the words “in one or more metropolitan areas” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 23 of 1976, s. 3]  
19. Subordination of Metropolitan Magistrates. —(1) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and every 
Additional Ch ief Metropolitan Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge; and every other 
Metropolitan Magistrate shall, subject to the general control of the Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.  
(2) The High Court may, for th e purposes of this Code, define the extent of the subordination, if any, 
of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrates to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.  
(3) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders,  
consistent with this Code, as to the distribution of business among the Metropolitan Magistrates and as to 
the allocation of business to an Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.  
20. Executive Magistrates. —(1) In every district and in every metropolita n area, the State 
Government may appoint as many persons as it thinks fit to be Executive Magistrates and shall appoint 
one of them to be the District Magistrate.  
                                                 
1. The words “or to cases generally” omitted by  Act 45 of 1978 , s. 6 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 6 ,  ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978) . 34 
 (2) The State Government may appoint any Executive Magistrate to be an Additional District 
Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have 1[such] of the powers of a District Magistrate under this Code 
or under any other law for the time being in force 2[as may be directed by the State Government].  
 (3) Whenever, in consequence of the office of a Distr ict Magistrate becoming vacant, any officer 
succeeds temporarily to the executive administration of the district, such officer shall, pending the orders 
of the State Government, exercise all the powers and perform all the duties respectively conferred and 
imposed by this Code on the District Magistrate.  
(4) The State Government may place an Executive Magistrate in charge of a sub -division and may 
relieve him of the charge as occasion requires; and the Magistrate so placed in charge of a sub -division 
shall b e called the Sub -divisional Magistrate.  
3[(4A) The State G overnment may, by general or special order and subject to such control and 
directions as it may deem fit to impose, delegate its powers under sub -section ( 4) to the District 
Magistrate.]  
(5) Nothin g in this section shall preclude the State Government from conferring, under any law for 
the time being in force, on a Commissioner of Police, all or any of the powers of an Executive Magistrate 
in relation to a metropolitan area.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pra desh  
In section 20 of the said Code, after sub-section (5), the following sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely : — 
 “(6) the State Government may delegate its powers under sub -section (4) to the District 
Magistrate.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 5 ] 
21. Special Executive Magistrates. —The State Government may appoint, for such term as it may 
think fit, Executive Magistrates, to be known as Special Executive Magistrates, for particular areas or for 
the performance of particular functions and confer on  such Special Executive Magistrates such of the 
powers as are conferrable under this Code on Executive Magistrates, as it may deem fit.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 2 1.— In section 21 of the said Code, in sub -section (2) the following  proviso 
shall be inserted and deemed always to have been inserted, namely : — 
“Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed to prohibit the State Government from 
exercising its control over Assistant Public Prosecutor through police officer s.” 
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 5] 
22. Local Jurisdiction of Executive Magistrates. —(1) Subject to the control of the State 
Government, the District Magistrate may, from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within  
which the Exe cutive Magistrates may  exercise all or any of the powers with which they may be invested 
under this Code.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of every such 
Magistrate shall extend throughout the district.  
23. Su bordination of Executive Magistrates. —(1) All Executive Magistrates, other than the 
Additional District Magistrate, shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate , and every Executive 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 45 of 1978 , s. 7, for “all or any” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978) . 
2. Ins. by s. 7,  ibid., (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  35 
 Magistrate (other than the Sub -divisional Magistrate) exercising powers  in a sub -division shall also be 
subordinate to the Sub -divisional Magistrate, subject, however, to the general control of the District 
Magistrate . 
(2) The District Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders, consistent with 
this Code, as to the distribution of business among the Executive Magistrates subordinate to him and as to 
the allocation of business to an Additional District Magistrate.  
1[24. Public Prosecutors. —(1) For every High Court, the Central Government or the State 
Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also 
appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecutors, for conducting in such Court, any prosecution, appeal 
or other proceeding on behalf of the Central Governme nt or State Government, as the case may be.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Public Prosecutors for the purpose of 
conducting any case or class of cases in any district or local area.  
(3) For every district, the State Government shall app oint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint 
one or more Additional Public Prosecutors for the district:  
Provided that the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor appointed for one district may be 
appointed also to be a Public Prosecutor or an A dditional Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, for another 
district.  
(4) The District Magistrate shall, in consultation with the Sessions Judge, prepare a panel of names of 
persons, who are, in his opinion fit to be appointed as Public Prosecutors or Add itional Public Prosecutors 
for the district.  
(5) No person shall be appointed by the State Government as the Public Prosecutor or Additional 
Public Prosecutor for the district unless his name appears in the panel of names prepared by the District 
Magistrat e under sub -section ( 4). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), where in a State there exists a regular 
Cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor or an Additional 
Public Prosecutor only from a mong the persons constituting such Cadre:  
Provided that where, in the opinion of the State Government, no suitable person is available in such 
Cadre for such appointment that Government may appoint a person as Public Prosecutor or Additional 
Public Prosecu tor, as the case may be, from the panel of names prepared by the District Magistrate under 
sub-section ( 4). 
2[Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, — 
(a) “regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers ” means a Cadre of Prosecuting Officers which 
includ es therein the post of a Public Prosecutor, by whatever name called, and which provides for 
promotion of Assistant Public Prosecutors, by whatever name called, to that post;  
(b) “Prosecuting Officer ” means a person, by whatever name called, appointed to pe rform the 
functions of a Public  Prosecutor, an Additional  Public Prosecutor  or an Assistant Public Prosecutor 
under this Code.]  
(7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public 
Prosecutor under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) or sub -section (3) or sub -section (6), only if he has 
been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years.  
(8) The Central Government or the State Government may appoint, for the purposes of any case or 
class of cases, a pers on who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years as a Special 
Public Prosecutor : 
3[Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his choice to assist the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 8, for s ection  24 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 3 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   36 
 prosecution under this sub -section.]  
(9) For the purpos es of sub -section (7) and sub -section (8), the period during which a person has been 
in practice as a pleader, or has rendered (whether before or after the commencement of this Code) service 
as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public Prosecutor or A ssistant Public Prosecutor or other 
Prosecuting Officer, by whatever name called, shall be deemed to be the period during which such person 
has been in practice as an advocate.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section  24.- In section 24  of the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 
1974) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act)  in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) the words  and punctuation mark  “or the State Government shall ”, shall be omitted; and  
(ii) for the words “appoint a Public Prosecut or” the words “or the State Government shall appoint a 
Public Prosecutor ” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 20 of 1982, s. 2.]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 24. ---In Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) in its 
applica tion to the State of Maharashtra: — 
(a) in sub -section ( 6), the proviso shall be deleted;  
(b) after sub -section ( 6), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(6-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), the State Government may , subject 
to the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5), appoint a person who has been in practice as an advocate 
for not less than seven years, as the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the 
district. ”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 33 of 2014 , s. 2] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of Section 24 of Act II of 1974 .—In section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra, — 
(a) in sub -section (1), the words “, after consultation with the High Court,” shall be deleted; (b) in 
sub-section (4), for the words “in consultation with the Sessions Judge,” the words “with the approval 
of the State Government,” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 34 of 1981, s. 2]  
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 24. —In Section 24 of the principal Act. — 
(i) in sub -section ( 6), for the words, “brackets and figure “Notwithstanding anything contained in               
sub-section  (5)”, the words, brackets, letter and figures “Notwithstanding anything contained in                   
sub-section ( 5), but subject to the provisions of sub -section (6 -A)” shall be substituted and shall be 
deemed to have been substituted with effect from 18th December, 1978;  
(ii) after sub -section ( 6), the following sub -section shall be inserted a nd shall be deemed to have been 
inserted with effect from 18th December, 1978, namely: — 
“(6-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), the State Government may appoint a 
person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years as the Public Prosecutor 
or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district and it shall not be necessary to appoint the Public 37 
 Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district from among the person constituting the 
Cadre of Prosecuting Offi cers in the State of Madhya Pradesh and the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) 
and ( 5) shall apply to the appointment of a Public Prosecutor Additional Public Prosecutor under this 
sub-section ”; 
(iii) in sub -section ( 7), after the words, bracket and figure “sub-section ( 6)”, the words, brackets, 
figure and letter “or sub -section (6 -A)” shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with 
effect from 18th December, 1978; and  
(iv) in sub -section ( 9), for the words, brackets and figure, “sub-section ( 7)”, the words, brackets, 
figures and letter “sub-section (6 -A) and sub -section ( 7)” shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have 
been substituted with effect from 18th December, 1978.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 21 of 1995, s. 3.]  
West Bengal  
In Sub -section (6) of section 24 of the principal Act, for the words “shall appoint a Public Prosecutor 
or an Additional Public Prosecutor only”, the words “may also appoint a Public Prosecutor or an 
Additional Public Prosecutor” shall be substituted.  
[Vide West Benga l Act 26 of 1990, s. 3.]   
West Bengal  
In sub -section (6) of section 24 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 25 of 1992, s. 3.]  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). — 
Section 24. — After sub -section (6), insert the followi ng sub -section, namely: — 
“(6A). –Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) and sub -section (6), the  
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir may appoint a person who has been in  
practice as an Advocate for not less than seven years  as Public Prosecutor or Additional Public  
Prosecutor for High Court and for the District Courts and it shall not be necessary to appoint  Public 
Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the High Court in consultation with High  Court and 
Public Prosec utor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the District Court from amongst  the person 
constituting the cadre of Prosecution for the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ” 
[vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, vide 
notific ation No. S.O . 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, notification No . S.O.3774(E), dated  (23-10-2020).]  
 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).  —  
Section 24 .-In sub -section (7), for “sub -section (6)”, substitute “sub -section (6) or sub -section (6A)”  
[Vide Order No. 3807(E) dated 26th October, 2020, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Third Order, 2020 (w.e.f. 26 -10-2020).]  
Uttar Pr adesh. — 
In section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  — 
(a) in sub -section (1), after words “Public Prosecutor” the words “and one or more Additional Public 
Prosecutors” shall be inserted and be deemed always to have been inserted :  38 
 (b) after sub -section (6), the following sub -section shall be inserted and be deemed always to have 
been inserted, namely : — 
“(7) For the purposes of sub -section (5) and (6), the period during which a person has been in 
practice as a pleader, or has rendered service as a  Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor or 
Assistant Public Prosecutor shall be deemed to be the period during which such person has been in 
practice as an advocate.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 33 of 1978, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
 In section 24 of the Co de of Criminal Procedure, 1973, hereinafter referred to as said Code : — 
(a) in sub -section (1), the words “after consultation with the High Court,” shall be omitted;  
(b) sub -section (4), (5) and (6) shall be omitted.  
(c) in sub -section (7), the words “or s ub-section (6)” shall be omitted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1991, s. 2]  
Bihar  
2. Amendment of Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act II of 1974) in its  
application to the State of Bihar. —For sub -section (6) of Section 24 of the Code of  Criminal  Procedure, 
1973 (Act II of 1974) the following sub -section shall be substituted and shall always be  deemed to have 
been substituted namely:  — 
“(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (5) wherein a State there exists a regular  
cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government may also appoint a Public  Prosecutor or  an 
Additional Public Prosecutor from among the persons constituting such cadre. ” 
[Vide Bihar Act 16 of 1984, s. 2]  
25. Assistant Public prosecutors. —(1) The State Governm ent shall appoint in every district one or 
more Assistant  Public Prosecutors for conducting prosecutions in the Courts of Magistrates.  
1[(1A) The Central Government may appoint one or more Assistant Public Prosecutors for the 
purpose of conducting any cas e or class of cases in the Courts of Magistrates.]  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), no police officer shall be eligible to be appointed as 
an Assistant Public Prosecutor.  
(3) Where no Assistant Public Prosecutor is available for the purpo ses of any particular case, the 
District Magistrate may appoint any other person to be the Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of that 
case:  
Provided that a police officer shall not be so appointed — 
(a) if he has taken any part in the investigation into the offence with respect to which the accused 
is being prosecuted; or  
(b) if he is below the rank of Inspector.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s.  9 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).   39 
  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 25 .—In section 25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  
(hereinafter referred to  as the said Code), to sub -section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed, to prohibit the State Government from 
exercising its control over Assistant Public Prosecutors through poli ce officers.”  
[Vide Orissa Act  6 of 1995, s. 2]  
1[25A. Directorate of Prosecution .—(1) The State Government may establish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as many Deputy Directors of Prosecution as it 
thinks fit.  
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Director of Prosecution or a Deputy Director of 
Prosecution, only if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years and such 
appointment shall be made with the concurrence of the Chief J ustice of the High Court.  
(3) The Head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of Prosecution, who shall 
function under the administrative control of the Head of the Home Department in the State.  
(4) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution sha ll be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.   
(5) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointed 
by the State Government under sub -section ( 1), or as the case may be, sub -section ( 8), of section 24 to 
conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.   
(6) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointed 
by the State Government under sub -section ( 3), or as the case may be, sub -section ( 8), of section 24 to 
conduct cases in District Courts and every Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 25 shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Prosecution.  
(7) The powers and functions of the Director of Pr osecution and the Deputy Directors of Prosecution 
and the areas for which each of the Deputy Directors of Prosecution have been appointed shall be such as 
the State Government may, by notification, specify.  
(8) The provisions of this section shall not appl y to the Advocate General for the State while 
performing the functions of a Public Prosecutor.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
In section 25A  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act No. 2 of 1974),  — 
(a) for sub -section ( 2), the following shall be substitute d, namely: —“(2) The post of Director of 
prosecution and Government litigations, or a Deputy Director of Prosecution and other cadres shall be filled in 
accordance with the Cadre and Recruitment Rules framed under the Karnataka State Civil Service s Act, 1978 
(Karnataka Act 14 of 1990). ” 
(b) for sub -section ( 5), the following shall be substitute d, namely: —“(5) Every Public Prosecutor, 
Additional Public Prosecutor appointed by the State Government from the cadre of   Prosecutors recruited 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s.  4 (w.e .f. 23 -6-2006).   40 
 under the re cruitment rules framed by the Government under the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 
shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution and Government litigations and every Public Prosecutor, 
Additional Prosecutor and Special Prosecutor appointed u nder sub -section ( 8) of section 24 shall be 
subordinate to the Advocate General. ” 
(c) in sub -section (6), for the words “Deputy Director of Prosecution,  the words “Director of Prosecution ” 
shall be substituted . 
[Vide Karnataka Act 39 of 2012 ,  s. 2] 
Madhy a Pradesh  
Substitution of Section 25A .—For section 25A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“25A. Directorate of Prosecution .—(1) The State Government may establish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Directo r of Prosecution and as many Additional Directors of Prosecution, 
Joint Directors of Prosecution, Deputy Directors of Prosecution and Assistant Directors of Prosecution 
and such other posts as it thinks fit.  
(2) The post of Director of Prosecution, Additio nal Directors of Prosecution, Joint Directors of 
Prosecution, Deputy Directors of Prosecution and Assistant Directors of Prosecution and other post shall 
be filled in accordance with the Madhya Pradesh Public Prosecution (Gazetted) Service Recruitment 
Rule s, 1991, as amended from time to time.  
(3) The head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of Prosecution, who shall function 
under the administrative control of the head of the Home Department in the State.  
(4) Every Additional Director o f Prosecution, Joint Director of Prosecution, Deputy Director of 
Prosecution and Assistant Director of Prosecution and other posts specified in sub -section ( 2) shall be 
subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.  
(5) Every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor appointed under the Madhya Pradesh 
Public Prosecution (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1991, shall be subordinate to the Director of 
Prosecution and every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor appointed under                  
sub-section ( 1) of Section 24 and every Special Public Prosecutor appointed under sub -section ( 8) of 
Section 24 to conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Advocate General.  
(6) Every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecu tor appointed under sub -section (3) of 
Section 24 and every Special Public Prosecutor appointed under sub -section ( 8) of Section 24 to conduct 
cases in District Courts shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate.  
(7) The powers and functions of the Dir ector of Prosecution shall be such as the State Government 
may, by notification, specify. ”. 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 18 of 2014, s. 3]  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). — 
Section 25A .-(i) for sub -sections (1) and (2), substitute – 
(1) The Government of the  Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall establish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Director General of Prosecution and such other officers, as may be 
provided in rules to be framed by the said Government; and  
(2) The Post of Director Genera l of Prosecution and all other officers, constituting the prosecution 
cadre, shall be filled in accordance with the rules to be framed by the said Government.  
(ii) in sub -section (3), substitute “Director of Prosecution” with “Director General of 
Prosecuti on”; 41 
 (iii) for sub -section (4), substitute “(4) subject to the control of the Director General of 
Prosecution, the Deputy Director shall be subordinate to and under the Control of a Joint Director.”  
(iv) substitute sub -section (5), – 
“Every Public Prosecuto r, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor  appointed 
by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir under subsection  (1), or the case 
may be under sub -section (8) of section 24 to conduct cases in the  High Court shall be s ubordinate to 
the Advocate General. ”; 
(v) for sub -section (7), substitute –  
“(7) The powers and functions of the Director General of Prosecution and other officers  of the 
prosecution cadre shall be such as may be provided by the rules ”. 
[Vide the Jammu and  Kashmir Reorganization ( Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, Vide 
notification No. S.O . 1123(E) dated  (18-3-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, notification No. S.O .3774(E), dated (23-10-2020).]  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs ).—  
Section 25A .-In sub -section (4), for “Joint Director”, substitute “Director Prosecution”.  
[Vide Order No.  3807(E) dated  26th October , 2020, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Third Order , 2020 ( w.e.f . 26-10-2020).]  
 
CHAPTER III  
POWER OF COURTS  
26. Courts by which offences are triable. —Subject to the other provisions of this Code, — 
(a) any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be tried by − 
(i) the Hi gh Court, or  
(ii) the Court of Session, or  
(iii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in th e First Schedule to be  triable:  
1[Provided that any 2[offence under section 376, 3[section 376A, section 376A B, section 376B, section 
376C, section 376D , section 376DA , 376DB ] or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) ] 
shall be tried as far as practicable by a Court presided over by a woman.]  
(b) any offence under any other law shall, when any Court is mentioned in  this behalf in such 
law, be tried by  such Court and when no Court is so mentioned, may be tried by — 
(i) the High Court, or  
(ii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in t he First Schedule to be triable . 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 26 .—In the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 26, in the proviso to clause (a), for the words figures and letters “offence under 
section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal 
Code” the words, figures and letters “offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376AA, section 
376B, section 376C, section 376D, 376DA of section 376E of the Indian Penal Code” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of  2019, s. 11]  
 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Subs.  by Act 13 of 2013, s. 11, for “offence under section 376 and sections 376A to 376D of the Indian Penal                                       
Code  (45 of 1860) ” (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 10, for “sec tion 376A,  section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  42 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 26 of the said Code, for clause (b),  the following clause shall be substituted , namely : — 
“(b) any offence under any other law may be tried : — 
(i) when any court is mentioned in this behalf in such law, by such court , or by any court 
superior in rank to such court, and  
(ii) when no court is so mentioned, by any court by which such offence is shown in the First 
Schedule to be tribal, or by any court superior in rank to such court. ”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984 , s. 6] 
27. Jurisdiction in the case of juveniles. —Any offence not punishable with death or imprisonment 
for life, committed by any person who at the date when he appears or is brought before the Court is under 
the age of sixteen years, may be tried by the Co urt of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, or by any Court 
specially empowered under the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960), or any other law for the time being in 
force providing for the treatment, training and rehabilitation of youthful offenders.  
28. Sentences wh ich High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass. —(1) A High Court may pass any 
sentence authorised by law.  
(2) A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised by law; but any 
sentence of death passed by any such Judge shall be s ubject to confirmation by the High Court.  
(3) An Assistant Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised by law except a sentence of death 
or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding ten years.  
29. Sentences which Magistrates may  pass. —(1) The Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass 
any sentence authorised by law except a sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment 
for a term exceeding seven years.  
 (2) The Court of a Magistrate of the first class may pa ss a sentence of imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding three years, or of fine not exceeding 1[ten thousand rupees ], or of both.  
(3) The Court of Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding one year, or of fi ne not exceeding 2[five thousand rupees] , or of both.  
(4) The Court of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall have the powers of the Court of a Chief 
Judicial Magistrate and that of a Metropolitan Magistrate, the powers of the Court of a Magistrate of the 
first class.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Manipur  
In section 29 of the Code, after sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be added, namely” —  
“(2A) The Court of a Specified Executive Magistrate may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding two years, or of fine not exceeding two thousand rupees, or of both.”.  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 29 of Act 2 of 1974 .—In section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974), in its appli cation to the State of Maharashtra, —  
(a) in sub -section (2), for the words “ten thousand rupees” the words “fifty thousand rupees” shall 
be substituted;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 5, for “five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f.  23-6-2006).  43 
 (b) in sub -section (3), for the words “five thousand rupees” the words “ten thousand rupees” shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 27 of 2007, s. 2]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 29 .—In section 29 of the principal Act (i) in sub -section (2), for the words 
“ten thousand rupees” the words “one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.  
(i) in sub -section ( 3), for the words “five thousand rupees”, the words twenty five thousand rupees shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 12]  
30. Sentence of imprisonment in default of fine. —(1) The Court of a Magistrate may award such 
term of imprisonment in default of payment of fine as is authorised by law:  
Provided that the term — 
(a) is not in excess of the powers of the Magistrate under section 29;  
(b) shall not, where imprisonment has been awarded as part of the substantive sentence, e xceed 
one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which the Magistrate is competent to inflict as punishment for 
the offence otherwise than as imprisonment in default of payment of the fine.  
(2) The imprisonment awarded under this section may be in addition to a substantive sentence of 
imprisonment for the maximum te rm awardable by the Magistrate under section 29.  
31. Sentence in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial. —(1) When a person is convicted at 
one trial of two or more offences, the Court m ay, subject to the provisions of section 71 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of  1860), sentence him for such offences, to the several punishments prescribed therefor which such 
Court is competent to inflict; such punishments when consisting of imprisonment to  commence the one after 
the expiration of the other in such order as the Court may direct, unless the Court directs that such punishments 
shall run concurrently.  
(2) In the case of consecutive sentences, it shall not be necessary for the Court by reason o nly of the 
aggregate punishment for the several offences being in excess of the punishment which it is competent to 
inflict on conviction of a single offence, to send the offender for trial before a higher Court:  
Provided that — 
(a) in no case shall such pe rson be sentenced to imprisonment for a longer period than fourteen  
years;  
(b) the aggregate punishment shall not exceed twice the amount of punishment which the Court 
is competent to inflict for a single offence.  
(3) For the purpose of appeal by a convi cted person, the aggregate of the consecutive sentences 
passed against him under this section shall be deemed to be a single sentence.     
32. Mode of conferring powers. —(1) In conferring powers under this Code, the High Court or the 
State Government, as t he case may be, may, by order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of 
their offices or classes of officials generally be their official titles.  
 (2) Every such order shall take effect from the date on which it is communicated to the person so 
empowered.  
33. Powers of officers appointed. —Whenever any person holding an office in the service of 
Government who has been invested by the High Court or the State Government with any powers under 44 
 this Code throughout any local area is appointed to an equa l or higher office of the same nature, within a 
like local area under the same State Government, he shall, unless the High Court or the State Government, 
as the case may be, otherwise directs, or has otherwise directed, exercise the same powers in the loca l 
area in which he is so appointed.  
34. Withdrawal of powers. —(1) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may 
withdraw all or any of the powers conferred by it under this Code on any person or by any officer 
subordinate to it.  
(2) Any powers conferred by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or by the District Magistrate may be  
withdrawn by the respective Magistrate by whom such powers were conferred.  
35. Powers of Judges and Magistrates exercisable by their successors -in-office. —(1) Subject to  
the other provisions of this Code, the powers and duties of a Judge or Magistrate may be exercised or 
performed by his successor -in-office.  
(2) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor -in-office of any Additional or Assistant 
Sessions Judge, the  Sessions Judge shall determine by order in writing the Judge who shall, for the 
purposes of this Code or of any proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor -in-office 
of such Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge.  
(3) When there is any  doubt as to who is the successor -in-office of any Magistrate, the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall determine by order in writing the 
Magistrate who shall, for the purpose of this Code or of any proceeding s or order thereunder, be deemed 
to be the successor -in-office of such Magistrate.  
CHAPTER IV  
A.—POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE  
36. Powers of superior officers of police .—Police officers superior in rank to an officer in charge of 
a police station may exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as 
may be exercised by such officer within the limits of his station.  
B.—AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE  
37. Public when to assist Magistrates and police .—Every person i s bound to assist a Magistrate or 
police officer reasonably demanding his aid — 
(a) in the taking or preventing the escape of any other person whom such Magistrate or police 
officer is authorised to arrest; or  
(b) in the prevention or suppression of a breac h of the peace; or  
(c) in the prevention of any injury attempted to be committed to any railway, canal, telegraph or 
public property.  
38. Aid to person, other than police officer, executing warrant .—When a warrant is directed to a 
person other than a polic e officer, any other person may aid in the execution of such warrant, if the person 
to whom the warrant is directed be near at hand and acting in the execution of the warrant.  
39. Public to give information of certain offences .—(1) Every person, aware of t he commission of, 
or of the intention of any other person to commit, any offence punishable under any of the following 
sections of the Indian  Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely: — 
(i) sections 121 to 126, both inclusive, and section 130 (that is to say, offenc es against the State specified 
in Chapter VI of the said Code);  
(ii) sections 143, 144, 145, 147 and 148 (that is to say, offences against the public tranquillity 
specified in Chapter VIII of the said Code);  45 
 (iii) sections 161 to 165A, both inclusive (that  is to say, offences relating to illegal 
gratification);  
(iv) sections 272 to 278, both inclusive (that is to say, offences relating to adulteration of food 
and drugs, etc.);  
(v) sections 302, 303 and 304 (that is to say, offences affecting life);  
1[(va) section 364A (that is to say, offence relating to kidnapping for ransom, etc.);]  
(vi) section  382 (that is to say, offence of theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or 
restraint in order to the committing of the theft);  
(vii) sections 392 to 3 99, both inclusive, and section 402 (that is to say, offences of robbery 
and dacoity);  
(viii) section 409 (that is to say, offence relating to criminal breach of trust by public servant, 
etc.);  
(ix) sections 431 and 439, both inclusive (that is to say, off ences of mischief against property);  
(x) sections 449 and 450 (that is to say, offence of house trespass);  
 (xi) sections 456 to 460, both inclusive  (that is to say, offences of lurking house trespass); and  
(xii) sections 489A to 489E, both inclusive (th at is to say, offences relating to currency notes 
and bank notes),  
shall, in the absence of any reasonable excuse, the burden of proving which excuse shall lie upon the 
person so aware, forthwith give information to the nearest Magistrate or police officer  of such 
commission or intention.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, the term “offence ” includes any act committed at any place out 
of India which would constitute an offence if committed in India.  
40. Duty of officers employed in connection with the af fairs of a village to make certain 
report .—(1) Every officer employed in connection with the affairs of a village and every person residing 
in a village shall forthwith communicate to the nearest Magistrate or to the officer in charge of the nearest 
police  station, whichever is nearer, any information which he may possess respecting — 
(a) the permanent or temporary residence of any notorious receiver or vendor of stolen property 
in or near such village;  
(b) the resort to any place within, or the passage thro ugh, such village of any person whom he 
knows, or reasonably suspects, to be a thug, robber, escaped convict or proclaimed offender;  
(c) the commission of, or intention to commit, in or near such village any non -bailable offence or 
any offence punishable u nder section 143, section 144, section 145, section 147, or section 148 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(d) the occurrence in or near such village of any sudden or unnatural death or of any death under 
suspicious circumstances or the discovery in or  near such village of any corpse or part of a corpse, in 
circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion that such a death has occurred or the 
disappearance from such village of any person in circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion 
that a non -bailable offence has been committed in respect of such person;  
(e) the commission of, or intention to commit, at any place out of India near such village any act 
which, if committed in India, would be an offence punishable under any of the following secti ons of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely, 231 to 238 (both inclusive), 302, 304, 382, 392 to 399 
(both inclusive), 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457 to 460 (both inclusive), 489A, 489B, 489C and 489D;  
(f) any matter likely to affect the maintenance of order or the prevention of crime or the safety of 
person or property respecting which the District Magistrate, by general or special order made with the 
previous sanction of the State Government, has directed him to communicate information.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 3  (w.e.f. 22 -05-1993) . 46 
 (2) In this sec tion,— 
(i) “village ” includes village -lands;  
(ii) the expression “proclaimed offender ” includes any person proclaimed as an offender by any 
Court or authority in any territory in India to which this Code does not extend, in respect of any act 
which if comm itted in the territories to which this Code extends, would be an offence punishable 
under any of the following sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely, 302, 304, 382, 
392 to 399 (both inclusive), 402, 435, 436, 449, 450 and 457 to 460 (both inclusive);  
(iii) the words “officer employed in connection with the affairs of the village ” means a member 
of the panchayat of the village and includes the headman and every officer or other person appointed 
to perform any function connected with the admi nistration of the village.  
CHAPTER V  
ARREST OF  PERSONS  
41. When police may arrest without warrant. —(1) Any police officer may without an order from a 
Magistrate    and without a warrant, arrest any person — 
1[(a) who commits, in the presence of a police of ficer, a cognizable offence;  
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been 
received, or a reasona ble suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years 
whether with or without fine, if the following conditions are satisfied, namely: — 
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint, information, or 
suspicion that such pers on has committed the said offence;  
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary — 
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further off ence; or  
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or  
(c) to prevent such person from causin g the evidence of the offence to disappear or 
tampering with such evidence in any manner; or  
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the 
Court or to the police officer; or  
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court whenever required cannot 
be ensured,  
and the po lice officer shall record while making such arrest, his reaso ns in writing : 
2[Provided that  a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under 
the provisions of this sub -section, record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.] ; 
(ba) against whom credible information has been received that he has com mitted a cognizable 
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven years whether 
with or without fine or with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of 
that information that such person  has committed the said offence;]  
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code or by order of the State 
Government; or  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 5, for cls. ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act  41 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2010).   47 
 (d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected to be stolen 
property and who may reason ably be suspected of having committed an offence with reference to 
such thing; or  
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has escaped, or 
attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or  
(f) who is reasonably suspected of b eing a deserter from any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or  
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or 
credible information has been  received, or a  reasonable suspicion exists, of his having  been  
concerned  in, any  act  committed  at   any place out  of  India  which, if  committed  in  India, would  
have  been  punishable  as  an  offence, and  for  which he  is, under any law relating to extradition, or 
otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in c ustody in India; or  
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 356; or  
 (i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received from another 
police officer, provided that t he requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other 
cause for which the arrest is to be made and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be 
arrested without a warrant by the officer who issued the requisition.  
1[(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person concerned in a non -cognizable offence or 
against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been received or reasonable 
suspicion exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except und er a warrant or order of a 
Magistrate.]  
2[41A. Notice of appearance before police officer. —(1) 3[The police officer shall], in all cases 
where the arrest of a person is not required under the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 41, issue a 
notice dire cting the person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information 
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence, to appear 
before him or at such other place as may be specified in t he notice.  
(2) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to comply with the 
terms of the notice.  
(3) Where such person complie s and continues to comply with the notice, he shall not be arrested in 
respect of the offen ce referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of 
the opinion that he ought to be arrested.  
4[(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice or is unwilling to 
identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have been passed by a competent 
Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice.]  
41B. Procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest. —Every police officer while making 
an arrest shall — 
(a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will facilitate easy 
identification;  
(b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be — 
(i) attested by at least one witness, who is a member of the family of the person  arrested or a 
respectable member of the locality where the arrest is made;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 5, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2010).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 2010, s. 3, for “The police officer may” (w.e.f. 2 -11-2010).   
4. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2010).   48 
 (ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and  
(c) inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a member of his family, that 
he has a right to have a relative or a friend named by him to be i nformed of his arrest.  
41C. Control room at districts. —(1) The State Government shall establish a police control room — 
(a) in every district; and  
(b) at State level.  
(2) The State Government shall cause to be displayed on the  notice board kept outside the control rooms at 
every district, the names and addresses of the persons arrested and the name and designation of the police 
officers who made the arrests.  
(3) The control room at the Police Headquarters at the State level sha ll collect from time to time, details 
about the persons arrested, nature of the offence with which they are charged and maintain a database for the 
information of the general public.  
41D. Right of arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during in terrogation. —When any 
person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled to meet an advocate of his choice during 
interrogation, though not throughout interrogation.]  
42. Arrest on refusal to give name and residence. —(1) When any perso n who, in the presence of a 
police officer, has committed or has been accused of committing a non -cognizable offence refuses, on demand 
of such officer, to give his name and residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has reason to 
believe to  be false, he may be arrested by such officer in order that his name or residence may be ascertained.  
(2) When the true name and residence of such person have been ascertained, he shall be released on his 
executing a bond, with or without sureties, to appe ar before a Magistrate if so required:  
Provided that , if such person is not resident in India, the bond shall be secured by a surety or sureties 
resident in India.  
(3) Should the true name and residence of such person not be ascertained within twenty -four hours from 
the time of arrest or should he fail to execute the bond, or, if so required, to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall 
forthwith be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate having jurisdiction.  
43. Arrest by private person and procedure on such arres t.—(1) Any private person may arrest or 
cause to be arrested any person who in his presence commits a non -bailable and cognizable offence, or any 
proclaimed offender, and, without unnecessary delay, shall make over or cause to be made over any person so 
arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be taken in 
custody to the nearest police station.  
(2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under the provisions of section 41, a police of ficer 
shall re -arrest him.  
(3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a non -cognizable offence, and he refuses on the 
demand of a police officer to give his name and residence, or gives a name or residence which such officer has 
reason to beli eve to be false, he shall be dealt with under the provisions of section 42; but if there is no 
sufficient reason to believe that he has committed any offence, he shall be at once released.  
44. Arrest by Magistrate. —(1) When any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether 
Executive or Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person to arrest the 
offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, commit the offender to 
custo dy. 
(2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any time arrest or direct the arrest, in his 
presence, within his local jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is competent at the time and in the 
circumstances to issue a warrant.  
45. Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sections 41 to 44 (both inclusive), no member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be arrested for 
anything done or purported to be done by him in the discha rge of his official duties except after obtaining the 
consent of the Central Government.  49 
 (2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of sub -section (1) shall apply to 
such class or category of the members of the Force charged with the maintenance of public order as may be 
specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub -section shall apply as if 
for the expression “Central Government ” occurring therein, the expression “State Government ” were substituted.  
46. Arrest how made. —(1) In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall 
actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission t o the custody by 
word or action:  
1[Provid ed that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her 
submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed and, unless the circumstances 
otherwise require or unless the police officer is a female , the police officer shall not touch the person of the 
woman for making her arrest.]  
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavo ur to arrest him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police 
officer or other person may use all means n ecessary to effect  the arrest.  
(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not accused of an offence 
punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.  
2[(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and  before sunrise, and 
where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain 
the prior permission of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is 
committed or the arrest is to be made.]  
47. Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested. —(1) If any person acting under warrant of 
arrest , or any police officer having authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the person to be arrested has 
entered into, or is within, any place, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on demand 
of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer, allow him free ingress thereto, and afford all 
reasonable facilities for a search therein.  
(2) If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under sub -section (1), it shall be lawful in any case for a 
person acting under a warrant and in any case in which a warrant may issue, but cannot be obtained without 
affording the person to be arrested an op portunity of escape, for a police officer to enter such place and search 
therein, and in order to effect an entrance into such place, to break open any outer or inner door or window of 
any house or place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any  other person, if after notification of his 
authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance:  
Provided that, if any such place is an apartment in the actual occupancy of a female (not being the persons 
to be arrested) who, according to custom, does not appear in public, such person or police officer shall, before 
entering such apartment, give notice to such female that she is at liberty to withdraw and shall afford her every 
reasonable facility for withdrawing , and may then break open the apartment and enter it.  
 (3) Any police officer or other person authorised to make an arrest may break open any outer or inner 
door or window of any house or place in order to liberate himself or any other person who, having l awfully 
entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is detained therein.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 47 of the principal Act, Explanation  II inserted  by the U. P. Civil Laws (Reforms and 
Amendment) Act, 1954, shall be  omitted.  
[Vide Uttar Pra desh Act 57 of 1976, s. 3] 
48. Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions. —A police officer may, for the purpose of arresting 
without warrant any person whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in India.  
49. No unnecessary rest raint. —The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is 
necessary to prevent his escape.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  7 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  50 
 50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail. —(1) Every police officer 
or other person arresting any person without  warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the 
offence for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest.  
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other than a person accused of a non -bailable 
offence, he s hall inform the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange for 
sureties on his behalf.  
1[50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to a nominated person .—(1) 
Every police officer or ot her person making any arrest under this Code shall forthwith give the information 
regarding such arrest and place where the arrested person is being held to any of his friends, relatives or such 
other persons as may be disclosed or nominated by the arreste d person for the purpose of giving such 
information.  
(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under sub -section ( 1) as soon as he is 
brought to the police station.  
(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arr est of such person shall be made in a book to be 
kept in the police station in such form as may be prescribed in this behalf by the State Government.  
(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such arrested person is produced, to satisfy himsel f that the 
requirements of sub -section ( 2) and sub -section ( 3) have been complied with in respect of such arrested person.]  
51. Search of arrested person. —(1) Whenever a person is arrested by a police officer under a warrant which 
does not provide for the taking of bail, or under a warrant which provides for the taking of bail but the person 
arrested cannot furnish bail, and  
whenever a person is arrested without warrant, or by a private person under a warrant, and cannot legally be 
admitted to bail, or is u nable to furnish bail,  
the officer making the arrest or, when the arrest is made by a private person, the police officer to whom he 
makes over the person arrested, may search such person, and place in safe custody all articles, other than necessary 
wearing -apparel, found upon him and where any article is seized from the arrested person, a receipt showing the 
articles taken in possession by the police officer shall be given to such per son. 
(2) Whenever it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the se arch shall be made by another female with 
strict regard to decency.  
52. Power to seize offensive weapons. —The officer or other person making any arrest under this Code may 
take from the person arrested any offensive weapons which he has about his person, a nd shall deliver all weapons so 
taken to the Court or officer before which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by this Code 
to produce the person arrested.  
53. Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer. —(1) When a person is 
arrested on a charge of committing an offence of such a nature and alleged to have been committed under such 
circumstances that there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to 
the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police 
officer not below the rank of sub -inspector, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to 
make  such an examination of the person arrested as is reasonably necessary in order to ascertain the facts which may 
afford such evidence, and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.  
(2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this section, the examination shall be made only 
by, or under the supervision of, a female registered medical practitioner.  
2[Explanation .—In this section and in sections 53A and 54, — 
(a) “examination ” shall include the examination of blood, blood st ains, semen, swabs in case of sexual 
offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail clippings by the use of modern and scientific 
techniques including DNA profiling and such other tests which the registered medical practitioner  thinks 
necessary i n a particular case;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by t 25 of 2005, s. 8, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  51 
 (b) “registered medical practitioner ” means a medical practitioner who possesses any medical qualification 
as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and whose name has 
been entered in a  State Medical Register.]  
1[53A. Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner .—(1) When a person is arrested on a 
charge of committing an offence of rape or an attempt to commit rape and there are reasonable grounds for believing 
that an e xamination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of such offence, it shall be lawful for a 
registered medical practi tioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or by a local authority and in the absence 
of such a practitioner with in the radius of sixteen kilometres from the place where the offence has been committed, by 
any other registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police officer not below the rank of a sub -inspector, 
and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to make such an examination of the arrested 
person and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.  
(2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall, without delay, examine such  person 
and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely: — 
(i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was brought,  
(ii) the age of the accused,  
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the ac cused,  
(iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA profiling, and  
(v) other material particulars in reasonable detail.  
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.  
(4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report.  
(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report to the investigating officer, who 
shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 1 73 as part of the documents referred to in clause ( a) of            
sub-section ( 5) of that section.]  
2[54. Examination of arrested person by medical officer. —(1) When any person is arrested, he shall be 
examined by a medical officer in the service of Cent ral or State Government, and in case the medical officer is not 
available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made:  
Provided that where the arrested person is a female, the examination of the body shall be made only by or under 
the supervision of a female medical officer, and in case the female medical officer is not available, by a female 
registered medical practitioner.  
(2) The medical officer or a registered medical practitioner so examining the arrested person shall prepare th e 
record of such examination, mentioning therein any injuries or marks of violence upon the person arrested, and the 
approximate time when such injuries or marks may have been inflicted.  
(3) Where an examination is made under sub -section ( 1), a copy of the  report of such examination shall be 
furnished by the medical officer or registered medical practitioner, as the case may be, to the arrested person or the 
person nominated by such arrested person.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 54 of the said C ode, the following sentence shall be  inserted  at the end, namely : — 
“The registered medical practitioner shall forthwith furnish to the arrested person a copy of the 
report of such examination free of cost.”  
[Vide Uttarkhand Act 1 of 1984, s. 7]  
3[54A. Ide ntification of person arrested .—Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 9 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 8, for  section 54  (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 11 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  52 
 and his identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of investigation of such 
offence, the Court, having jurisdiction m ay, on the request of the officer in charge of a police station, direct the 
person so arrested to subject himself to identification by any person or persons in such m anner as the Court may 
deem fit: ] 
1[Provided that, if the person identifying the person  arrested is mentally or physically disabled, such process of 
identification shall take place under the super vision of a Judicial Magistrate who shall take appropriate steps to 
ensure that such person identifies the person arrested using methods that person i s comfortable with:  
Provided further that if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically disabled, the 
identification process shall be videographed.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of new section 54 -A.—After  section 54 of the said Code, the following section shall be 
inserted , namely : — 
“54-A. Test identification of the Accused. — When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an 
offence and his test identification by any witness is considered necessary by any court hav ing jurisdiction, 
it shall be lawful for Executive Magistrate acting at the instance of such court, to hold test identification 
of the person arrested. ”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984 , s. 8] 
55. Procedure when police officer deputes subordinate to arre st without warrant. —(1) When any officer in 
charge of a police station or any police officer making an investigation under Chapter XII requires any officer 
subordinate to him to arrest without a warrant (otherwise than in his presence) any person who may l awfully be 
arrested without a warrant, he shall deliver to the officer requi red to make the arrest an order  in writing, specifying 
the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for w hich the arrest is to  be  made and the officer so 
required sha ll, before making the arrest, notify to the person to be arrested the substance of the order and, if so 
required by such person, shall show him the order.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section (1) shall affect the power of a police officer to arrest a person under se ction 41.   
2[55A. Health and safety of arrested person. —It shall be the duty of the person having the custody 
of an accused to take reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.]  
56. Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in c harge of police station. —A 
police officer making an arrest without warrant shall, without unnecessary delay and subject to the 
provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in charge of a police station.  
57. Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty -four hours .—No police officer shall 
detain in custody a person arrested without warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances of 
the ca se is reasonable, and such period shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate under 
section 167, exceed twenty -four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of 
arrest to the Magistrate’s Court.  
58. Police to rep ort apprehensions .—Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District 
Magistrate, or, if he so directs, to the Sub -divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without 
warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whe ther such persons have been admitted to bail or 
otherwise.  
59. Discharge of person apprehended .—No person who has been arrested by a police officer shall 
be discharged except on his own bond, or on bail, or under the special order of a Magistrate.  
60. Powe r, on escape, to pursue and retake .—(1) If a person in lawful custody escapes or is 
rescued, the person from whose custody he escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest 
him in any place in India.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 12 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  9 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009) .  53 
 (2) The provisions of section 47 shall apply t o arrests under sub -section ( 1) although the person 
making any such arrest is not acting under a warrant and is not a police officer having authority to arrest.  
1[60A. Arrest to be made strictly according to the Code. —No arrest shall be made except in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code or any other law for the time being in force providing for 
arrest.]  
CHAPTER VI  
PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE  
A.—Summons  
61. Form of summons .—Every summons issued by a Court under this Code shall be in writing, in 
duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by such other officer as the High Court may, 
from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the Court.  
62. Summons how served .—(1) Every summons shall be served by a police officer, o r subject to 
such rules as the State Government may make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other 
public servant.  
(2) The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on the person summoned, by delivering or 
tendering to him on e of the duplicates of the summons.  
 (3) Every person on whom a summons is so served shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a 
receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate.  
63. Service of summons on corporate bodies and societies. —Service  of a summons on a 
corporation may be effected by serving it on the secretary, local manager or other principal officer of the 
corporation, or by letter sent by registered post, addressed to the chief officer of the corporation in India, 
in which case the service shall be deemed to have been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course 
of post.  
Explanation .—In this section, “corporation ” means an incorporated company or other body corporate and 
includes a society registered under the Societies R egistration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860).  
64. Service when persons summoned cannot be found. —Where the person summoned cannot, by the exercise  
of due diligence, be  found, the summons may be served by leaving one of the duplicates for him with some adult 
male me mber of his family residing with him, and the person with whom the summons is so left shall, if so required 
by the serving o fficer, sign a receipt therefor  on the back of the other duplicate.  
Explanation .—A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section.  
65. Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided. —If service cannot by the exercise of due 
diligence be effected as provided in section 62, section 63 or section 64, the serving officer shall affix one of the 
duplic ates of the summons to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which the person summoned 
ordinarily resides; and thereupon the Court, after making such inquiries as it thinks fit, may either declare that the 
summons has been duly served or order  fresh service in such manner as it considers proper.  
66. Service on Government servant. —(1) Where the person summoned is in the active service of the 
Government, the Court issuing the summons shall ordinarily send it in duplicate to the head of the office  in which 
such person is employed; and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be served in the manner provided by 
section 62, and shall return it to the Court under his signature with the endorsement required by that section.  
(2) Such signature sha ll be evidence of due service.  
67. Service of summons outside local limits. —When a Court desires that a summons issued by it shall be 
served at any place outside its local jurisdiction, it shall ordinarily send such summons in duplicate to a Magistrate 
within whose local jurisdiction the person  summoned resides, or is, to be there served.  
68. Proof of service in such cases and when serving officer not present .—(1) When a summons issued by a 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.10 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   54 
 Court is served outside its local jurisdiction, and in any case w here the officer who has served a summons is not 
present at the hearing of the case, an affidavit, purporting to be made before a Magistrate, that such summons has 
been served, and a duplicate of the summons purporting to be endorsed (in the manner provide d by section 62 or 
section 64) by the person to whom it was delivered or tendered or with whom it was left, shall be admissible in 
evidence, and the statements made therein shall be deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved.  
(2) The affi davit mentioned in this section may be attached to the duplicate of the summons and returned to the 
Court.  
69. Service of summons on witness by post .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding 
sections of this Chapter, a Court issuing a summon s to a witness may, in addition to and simultaneously with the 
issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by registered post addressed to the witness at the 
place where he ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.  
(2) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the witness or an endorsement purporting to be made 
by a postal employee that the witness refused to take delivery of the summons has been received, the Court issuing 
the summons may declare that the summons has been duly served.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andaman and  Nicobar Islands U.T.  
In section  69 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974 in is application to the Union Territories of the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshdeep, — 
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the words “to be served by registered post ” the words “or of the substance 
thereof to be served by wireless message ” shall be inserted.  
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for the words “that the witness refused to take delivery of the  summons ” the words “or a 
wireless  messenger that the witness refused to take  delivery of  the summons  or the  message,  as the  ease may 
be” shall be substi tuted.  
[Vide Andaman and  Nicobar Islands U.T. Act 6 of 1977, s. 2 ] 
B.—Warrant of arrest  
70. Form of warrant of arrest and dura tion.—(1) Every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under this Code 
shall be in writing, signed by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the Court.  
 (2) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court wh ich issued it, or until it is 
executed.  
71. Power to direct security to be taken .—(1) Any Court issuing a warrant for the arrest of any person may 
in its discretion direct by endorsement on the warrant that, if such person executes a bond with sufficient s ureties 
for his attendance before the Court at a specified time and thereafter until otherwise directed by the Court, the 
officer to whom the warrant is directed shall take such security and shall release such person from custody.  
(2) The endorsement shall  state— 
(a) the number of sureties;  
(b) the amount in which they and the person for whose arrest the warrant is issued, are to be respectively 
bound;  
(c) the time at which he is to attend before the Court.  
(3) Whenever security is taken under this section,  the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall forward the 
bond to the Court.  
72. Warrants to whom directed .—(1) A warrant of arrest shall ordinarily be directed to one or more police 55 
 officers; but the Court issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate  execution is necessary and no police officer is 
immediately available, direct it to any other person or persons, and such person or persons shall execute the same.  
(2) When a warrant is directed to more officers or persons than one, it may be executed by all, or by any one or 
more of them.  
73. Warrant may be directed to any person .—(1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first 
class may direct a warrant to any person within his local jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped convict, 
proclaimed offender or of any person who is accused of a non -bailable offence and is evading arrest.  
(2) Such person shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the warrant, and shall execute it if the person for 
whose arrest it was issued, is in, or enters on , any land or other property under his charge.  
(3) When the person against whom such warrant is issued is arrested, he shall be made over with the warrant to 
the nearest police officer, who shall cause him to be taken before a Magistrate having jurisdictio n in the case, unless 
security is taken under section 71.  
74. Warrant directed to police officer. —A warrant directed to any police officer may also be executed by any 
other police officer whose name is endorsed upon the warrant by the officer to whom it is  directed or endorsed.  
75. Notification of substance of warrant. —The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest 
shall notify the substance thereof to the person to be arrested, and, if so required, shall show him the warrant.  
76. Person a rrested to be brought before Court without delay. —The police officer or other person executing 
a warrant of arrest shall (subject to the provisions of section 71 as to security) without unnecessary delay bring the 
person arrested before the Court before wh ich he is required by law to produce such person:  
Provided that such delay shall not, in any case, exceed twenty -four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the 
journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate’s Court.  
77. Where warrant may be execute d.—A warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India.  
78. Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction. —(1) When a warrant is to be executed outside the 
local jurisdiction of the Court issuing it, such Court may, instead of directing the wa rrant to a police officer within 
its jurisdiction, forward it by post or otherwise to any Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or 
Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction it is to be executed; and the Execut ive 
Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner shall endorse his name thereon, and if practicable, cause it to 
be executed in the manner hereinbefore provided.  
 (2) The Court issuing a warrant under sub -section (1) shall forward, along with the warrant, the substance of 
the information against the person to be arrested together with such documents, if any, as may be sufficient to enable 
the Court acting under section 81 to decide whether bail should or should not be granted to the person.  
79. War rant directed to police officer for execution outside jurisdiction. —(1) When a warrant directed to a 
police officer is to be executed beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same, he shall ordinarily take it 
for endorsement either to an Exec utive Magistrate or to a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of 
a police station, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed.  
(2) Such Magistrate or police officer shall endorse his name thereon and su ch endorsement shall be sufficient 
authority to the police officer to whom the warrant is directed to execute the same, and the local police shall, if so 
required, assist such officer in executing such warrant.  
 (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that  the delay occasioned by obtaining the endorsement of the 
Magistrate or police officer within whose local jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed will prevent such 
execution, the police officer to whom it is directed may execute the same without such en dorsement in any place 
beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court which issued it.  
80. Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued. —When a warrant of arrest is executed 
outside the district in which it was issued, the person arrested shall, u nless the Court which issued the warrant is 56 
 within thirty kilometr es of the place of arrest or is nearer than the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent  
of  Police or  Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the arres t was made, or unless 
security is taken under section 71, be taken before such Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner.  
81. Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested is brought. —(1) The Executive Magistrate 
or District Superint endent of Police or Commissioner of Police shall, if the person arrested appears to be the person 
intended by the Court which issued the warrant, direct his removal in custody to such Court:  
Provided that, if the offence is bailable, and such person is rea dy and willing to give bail to the satisfaction of 
such Magistrate, District Superintendent or Commissioner, or a direction has been endorsed under section 71 on the 
warrant and such person is ready and willing to give the security required by such directi on, the Magistrate, District 
Superintendent or Commissioner shall take such bail or security, as the case may be, and forward the bond, to the 
Court which issued the warrant:  
Provided further that if the offence is a non -bailable one, it shall be lawful fo r the Chief Judicial Magistrate 
(subject to the provisions of section 437), or the Sessions Judge, of the district in which the arrest is made on 
consideration of the information and the documents referred to in sub -section (2) of section 78, to release su ch 
person on bail.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a police officer from taking security under section 71.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 81 of the said Code, in sub -section (1), the following third proviso shall be inserte d,     
namely : — 
“Provided also that where such person is not released on bail or where he fails to give such security as 
aforesaid, the Chief Judicial Magistrate in the case of a non -bailable offence or any Judicial Magistrate in 
the case of a bailable of fence may be necessary for his removal to the court which issued the warrant.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 9]  
C.—Proclamation and attachment  
82. Proclamation for person absconding. —(1) If any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking 
evidence or not) that any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing 
himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to 
appear at a specified place and at a sp ecified time not less than thirty days from the date of publishing such 
proclamation.  
(2) The proclamation shall be published as follows: — 
(i) (a) it shall be publicly read in some conspicuous place of the town or village in which such person 
ordinarily re sides;  
(b) it shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which such person ordinarily 
resides or to some conspicuous place of such town or village;  
(c) a copy thereof shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the Court -house;  
(ii) the Court may also, if it thinks fit, direct a copy of the proclamation to be published in a daily 
newspaper circulating in the place in which such person ordinarily resides.  
 (3) A statement in writing by the Court issuing the proclamation to the ef fect that the proclamation was duly 
published on a specified day, in the manner specified in clause (i) of sub -section (2), shall be conclusive evidence 
that the requirements of this section have been complied with, and that the proclamation was published on such day.  
1[(4) Where a proclamation published under sub -section ( 1) is in respect of a person accused of an offence 
punishable under section 302, 304, 364, 367, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 402, 436, 449, 459 or 
                                                 
1. Ins. by  Act 25 of 2005, s. 12 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  57 
 460 o f the Indian P enal Code (45 of 1860), and such person fails to appear at the specified place and time required 
by the proclamation, the Court may, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender 
and make a declaration to that effect.  
(5) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) shall apply to a declaration made by the Court under 
sub-section ( 4) as they apply to the proclamation published under sub -section ( 1).] 
83.  Attachment of property of person absconding. —(1) The Court issuing a pr oclamation under 
section 82 may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, at any time after the issue  of the proclamation, order 
the attachment of any property, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person:  
Provided that where at the tim e of the issue of the proclamation the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or 
otherwise, that the person in relation to whom the proclamation is to be issued, — 
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or  
(b) is about to remove the who le or any part of his property from the local jurisdiction of the 
Court,  
it may order the attachment simultaneously with the issue of the proclamation.  
(2) Such order shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such person within the 
distri ct in which it is made; and it shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such person 
without such district when endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose district such property is 
situate.  
(3) If the property ordered to be attached  is a debt or other movable property, the attachment under 
this section shall be made — 
(a) by seizure; or  
(b) by the appointment of a receiver; or  
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the delivery of such property to the proclaimed person or to 
any one o n his behalf; or  
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit.  
(4) If the property ordered to be attached is immovable, the attachment under this section shall, in the 
case of land paying revenue to the State Government, be made through t he Collector of the district in 
which the land is situate, and in all other cases — 
(a) by taking possession; or  
(b) by the appointment of a receiver; or  
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the payment of rent on delivery of property to the 
proclaimed pe rson or to any one on his behalf; or  
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit.  
(5) If the property ordered to be attached consists of live -stock or is of a perishable nature, the Court 
may, if it thinks it expedient, order immediate s ale thereof, and in such case the proceeds of the sale shall 
abide the order of the Court.  
 (6) The powers, duties and liabilities of a receiver appointed under this section shall be the same as 
those of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedu re, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
84. Claims and objections to attachment. —(1) If any claim is preferred to, or objection made to the 
attachment of, any property attached under section 83, within six months from the date of such 
attachment, by any person other than th e proclaimed person, on the ground that the claimant or objector 
has an interest in such property, and that such interest is not liable to attachment under section 83, the 58 
 claim or objection shall be inquired into, and may be allowed or disallowed in whole  or in part:  
Provided that any claim preferred or objection made within the period allowed by this sub -section 
may, in the event of the death of the claimant or objector, be continued by his legal representative.  
(2) Claims or objections under sub -section (1) may be preferred or made in the Court by which the 
order of attachment is issued, or, if the claim or objection is in respect of property attached under an order 
endorsed under sub -section (2) of section 83, in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrat e of the district 
in which the attachment is made.  
(3) Every such claim or objection shall be inquired into by the Court in which it is preferred or made:  
Provided that, if it is preferred or made in the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, he may make it  
over for disposal to any Magistrate subordinate to him.  
(4) Any person whose claim or objection has been disallowed in whole or in part by an order under 
sub-section (1) may, within a period of one year from the date of such order, institute a suit to est ablish 
the right which he claims in respect of the property in dispute; but subject to the result of such suit, if any, 
the order shall be conclusive.  
85. Release, sale and restoration of attached property. —(1) If the proclaimed person appears 
within the t ime specified in the proclamation, the Court shall make an order releasing the property from 
the attachment.  
(2) If the proclaimed person does not appear within the time specified in the proclamation, the 
property under the attachment shall be at the dispo sal of the State Government; but it shall not be sold 
until the expiration of six months from the date of the attachment and until any claim preferred or 
objection made under section 84 has been disposed of under that section, unless it is subject to speed y and 
natural decay, or the Court considers that the sale would be for the benefit of the owner; in either of which 
cases the Court may cause it to be sold whenever it thinks fit.  
(3) If, within two years from the date of the attachment, any person whose p roperty is or has been at 
the disposal of the State Government, under sub -section ( 2), appears voluntarily or is apprehended and 
brought before the Court by whose order the property was attached, or the Court to which such Court is 
subordinate, and proves to the satisfaction of such Court that he did not abscond or conceal himself for 
the purpose of avoiding execution of the warrant, and that he had not such notice of the proclamation as to 
enable him to attend within the time specified therein, such proper ty, or,  if  the  same  has  been  sold, the 
net proceeds of the sale, or, if part only thereof has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale and the residue 
of the property, shall, after satisfying therefrom all costs incurred in consequence of the attachme nt, be 
delivered to him.  
86. Appeal from order rejecting application for restoration of attached property. —Any person 
referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 85, who is aggrieved by any refusal to deliver property or the 
proceeds of the sale thereof may appeal to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of 
the first -mentioned Court.  
D.—Other rules regarding processes  
87. Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons. —A Court may, in any case in which it 
is empowered by this C ode to issue a summons for the appearance of any person, issue, after recording its 
reasons in writing, a warrant for his arrest — 
(a) if, either before the issue of such summons, or after the issue of the same but before the time 
fixed for his appearance, the Court sees reason to believe that he has absconded or will not obey the 
summons; or  
(b) if at such time he fails to appear and the summons is proved to have been duly served in time 
to admit of his appearing in accordance therewith and no reasonable ex cuse is offered for such failure.  
88. Power to take bond for appearance. —When any person for whose appearance or arrest the 59 
 officer presiding in any Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such Court, such 
officer may require such p erson to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his appearance in such 
Court, or any other Court to which the case may be transferred for trial.  
89. Arrest on breach of bond for appearance. —When any person who is bound by any bond taken 
under this C ode to appear before a Court, does not appear, the officer presiding in such Court may issue a 
warrant directing that such person be arrested and produced before him.  
90. Provisions of this Chapter generally applicable to summonses and warrants of arrest. —The 
provisions contained in this Chapter relating to a summons and warrant, and their issue, service and 
execution, shall, so far as may be, apply to every summons and every warrant of arrest issued under this 
Code.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PROD UCTION OF THINGS  
A.—Summons to produce  
91. Summons to produce document or other thing. —(1) Whenever any Court or any officer in 
charge of a police station considers that the production of any document or other thing is necessary or 
desirable for the purpos es of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code by or 
before such Court or officer, such Court may issue a summons, or such officer a written order, to the 
person in whose possession or power such document or thing is believed t o be, requiring him to attend 
and produce it, or to produce it, at the time and place stated in the summons or order.  
(2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a document or other thing shall be 
deemed to have complied with the requisiti on if he causes such document or thing to be produced instead 
of attending personally to produce the same.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed — 
(a) to affect sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or the Bankers’ 
Books E vidence Act, 1891 (13 of 1891), or  
(b) to apply to a letter, postcard, telegram or other document or any parcel or thing in the custody 
of the postal or telegraph authority.  
92. Procedure as to letters and telegrams. —(1) If any document, parcel or thing in  the custody of a 
postal or telegraph authority is, in the opinion of the District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court 
of Session or High Court wanted for the purpose of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding 
under this Code, such M agistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph authority, as the case may 
be, to deliver the document, parcel or thing to such person as the Magistrate or Court directs.  
(2) If any such document, parcel or thing is, in the opinion of any other Magi strate, whether 
Executive or Judic ial, or of any Commissioner of P olice or District Superintendent of Police, wanted for 
any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph authority, as the case may be, to cause search to 
be made for and to detain su ch document, parcel or thing pending the order of a District Magistrate, Chief 
Judicial Magistrate or Court under sub -section (1). 
B.—Search -warrants  
93. When search -warrant may be issued. —(1) (a) Where any Court has reason to believe that a 
person to whom  a summons order under section 91 or a requisition under sub -section (1) of section 92 has 
been, or might be, addressed, will not or would not produce the document or thing as required by such 
summons or requisition, or  
(b) where such document or thing is not known to the Court to be in the possession of any person, or  60 
  (c) where the Court considers that the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this 
Code will be served b y a general search or inspection, it may issue a search -warrant; and  the person to 
whom such warrant is directed, may search or inspect in accordance therewith and the provisions 
hereinafter contained.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, specify in the warrant the particular place or part thereof to which 
only the search or inspection shall extend; and the person charged with the execution of such warrant 
shall then search or inspect only the place or part so specified.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall authorise any Magistrate other than a District Magistrate or  
Chief Judicial Magistrate to grant a warrant to search for a document, parcel or other thing in the custody 
of the postal or telegraph authority.  
94. Search of place suspected to contain stolen property, forged documents, etc .—(1) If a District 
Magistrate , Sub -divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class, upon information and after such 
inquiry as he thinks necessary, has reason to believe that any place is used for the deposit or sale of stolen 
property, or for the deposit, sale or production of  any objectionable article to which this section applies, or 
that any such objectionable article is deposited in any place, he may by warrant authorise any police 
office r above the rank of a constable — 
(a) to enter, with such assistance as may be required,  such place,  
(b) to search the same in the manner specified in the warrant,  
(c) to take possession of any property or article therein found which he reasonably suspects to be 
stolen property or objectionable article to which this section applies,  
(d) to co nvey such property or article before a Magistrate, or to guard the same on the spot until 
the offender is taken before a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose of it in some place of safety,  
(e) to take into custody and carry before a Magistrate every person found in such place who 
appears to have been privy to the deposit, sale or production of any such property or article knowing 
or having reasonable cause to suspect it to be stolen property or,  as the case may be, objectionable 
article to which this sectio n applies.  
(2) The objectionable articles to which this section applies are — 
(a) counterfeit coin;  
(b) pieces of metal made in contravention of the Metal Tokens Act, 1889 (1 of 1889), or brought 
into India in contravention of any notification for the time being in force under section 11 of the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);  
(c) counterfeit currency note; counterfeit stamps;  
(d) forged documents;  
(e) false seals;  
(f) obscene objects referred to in section 292 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(g) instruments or materials used for the production of any of the articles mentioned in clauses (a) 
to (f). 
95. Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to issue search -warrants for the                
same .—(1) Where — 
(a) any newspaper, or book, or  
(b) any document,  
wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain any matter the publication of which is 
punishable under section 124A or section 153A or section 153B or section 292 or section 293 or section 
295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 18 60), the State Government may, by notification, stating the 
grounds of its opinion, declare every  copy  of  the issue of the newspape r containing such matter, 
and every copy of such book or other  document to be forfeited to Government, and thereupon any 61 
 police officer may seize the same wherever found in India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise 
any police officer not below the rank of sub -inspector to enter upon and search for the same in any 
premises where any copy of such issue, or any such book  or other document may be or may be reasonably 
suspected to be.  
(2) In this section and in section 96 ,— 
(a) “newspaper ” and “book ” have the same meaning as in the Press and Registration of Books 
Act, 1867 (25 of 1867);  
(b) “document ” includes any painting,  drawing or photograph, or other visible representation.  
(3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called in question in any Court 
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of section 96.  
96. Application to High Court to set as ide declaration of forfeiture .—(1) Any person having any 
interest in any newspaper, book or other document, in respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has 
been made under section 95, may, within two months from the date of publication in the Official Gazette 
of such declaration, apply to the High Court to set aside such declaration on the ground that the issue of 
the newspaper, or the book or other document, in respect of which the declaration was made, did not 
contain any such matter as is referred to  in sub -section (1) of section 95.  
(2) Every such application shall, where the High Court consists of three or more Judges, be heard and 
determined by a Special Bench of the High Court composed of three Judges and where the High Court 
consists of less than  three Judges, such Special Bench shall be composed of all the Judges of that High 
Court.  
(3) On the hearing of any such application with reference to any newspaper, any copy of such 
newspaper may be given in evidence in aid of the proof of the nature or t endency of the words, signs or 
visible representation s contained in such newspaper, in respect of which the declaration of forfeiture was 
made.  
(4) The High Court shall, if it is not satisfied that the issue of the newspaper, or the book or other 
document,  in respect of which the application has been made, contained any such matter as is referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 95, set aside the declaration of forfeiture.  
(5) Where there is a difference of opinion among the Judges forming the Special Bench , the decision 
shall be in accordance with the opinion of the majority of those Judges.  
97. Search for persons wrongfully confined .—If any District Magistrate, Sub -divisional Magistrate 
or Magistrate of the first class has reason to believe that any person  is confined under such circumstances 
that the confinement amounts to an offence, he may issue a search -warrant, and the person to whom such 
warrant is directed may search for the person so confined; and such search shall be made in accordance 
therewith, a nd the person, if found, shall be immediately taken before a Magistrate, who shall make such 
order as in the circumstances of the case seems proper.  
98. Power to compel restoration of abducted females .—Upon complaint made on oath of the 
abduction or unlawf ul detention of a woman, or a female child under the age of eighteen years for any 
unlawful purpose, a District Magistrate, Sub -divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class may 
make an order for the immediate restoration of such woman to her libe rty, or of such female child to her 
husband,  parent,  guardian or other person having the lawful charge of such child, and may compel 
compliance with such order, using such force as may be necessary.  
C.—General provisions relating to searches  
99. Directio n, etc., of search -warrants .—The provisions of sections 38, 70, 72, 74, 77, 78 and 79 
shall, so far as may be, apply to all search -warrants issued under section 93, section 94, section 95 or 
section 97.  
100. Persons in charge of closed place to allow searc h.—(1) Whenever any place liable to search or 
inspection under this Chapter is closed, any person  residing in, or being in charge of, such place, shall, on 
demand of the officer or other person executing the warrant, and on production of the warrant, allo w him 62 
 free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable fa cilities  for a search therein.  
(2)  If ingress into such place cannot be so obtained, the officer or other person executing the warrant 
may proceed in the manner provided by sub -section (2) of sectio n 47.  
(3)  Where any person in or about such place is reasonably suspected of concealing about his person 
any article for which search should be made, such person may  be searched and if such person is a 
woman, the search  shall be made by another woman w ith strict regard to decency.  
(4) Before making a search under this Chapter, the officer or other person about to make it shall call 
upon two or more independent and respectable inhabitants of the locality in which the place to be 
searched is situate or o f any other locality if no such inhabitant of the said locality is available or is 
willing to be a witness to the search, to attend and witness the search and may issue an order in writing to 
them or any of them so to do.  
(5) The search shall be made in th eir presence, and a list of all things seized in the course of such 
search and of the places in which they are respectively found shall be prepared by such officer or other 
person and signed by such witnesses; but no person witnessing a search under this s ection shall be 
required to attend the Court as a witness of the search unless specially summoned by it.  
(6) The occupant of the place searched, or some person in his behalf, shall, in every instance, be 
permitted to attend during the search, and a copy of  the list prepared under this section, signed by the said 
witnesses, shall be delivered to such occupant or person.  
(7) When any person is searched under sub -section ( 3), a list of all things taken possession of shall be 
prepared, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to such person.  
(8) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neglects to attend and witness a search 
under this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing delivered or tendered to him, shall be 
deemed to have committ ed an offence under section 187 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
101. Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction .—When, in the execution of a             
search -warrant at any place beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court which issued t he same, any of the 
things for which search is made, are found, such things, together with the list of the same prepared under 
the provisions hereinafter contained, shall be immediately taken before the Court issuing the warrant, 
unless such place is neare r to the Magistrate having jurisdiction therein than to such Court, in which case 
the list and things shall be immediately taken before such Magistrate; and, unless there be good cause to 
the contrary, such Magistrate shall make an order authorising them t o be taken to such Court.  
 
D.—Miscellaneous  
102. Power of police officer to seize certain property .—(1) Any police officer may seize any 
property which may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or which may be found under 
circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence.  
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police station, shall forthwith report 
the seizure to that officer.  
1[(3) Every police officer acting under sub -section (1) shall forthwith re port the seizure to the 
Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it cannot be conveniently 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 10  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  63 
 transported to the Court, 1[or where there is difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the custody 
of such property, or where  the continued retention of the property in police custody may not be 
considered necessary for the purpose of investigation ,] he may give custody thereof to any person on his 
executing a  bond  undertaking  to produce the property before the Court as and w hen required and to give 
effect to the further orders of the Court  as to the disposal of the same: ] 
2[Provided that where the property seized under sub -section ( 1) is subject to speedy and natural decay 
and if the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent and the value of such 
property is less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under the orders of the 
Superintendent of Police and the provisions of sections 457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be 
practi cable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.]  
103. Magistrate may direct search in his presence .—Any Magistrate may direct a search to be 
made in his presence of any place for the search of which he is competent to issue a search -warrant.  
104. Power to i mpound document, etc., produced .—Any Court may, if it thinks fit, impound any 
document or thing produced before it under this Code.  
105. Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes .—(1) Where a Court in the territories to which 
this Code extends (hereafter  in this section referred to as the said territories) desires that — 
(a) a summons to an accused person, or  
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or  
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing, or t o 
produce it, or  
(d) a search -warrant,  
3[issued by it shall be served or executed at any place, — 
(i) within the local jurisdiction of a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories, 
it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate by po st or otherwise, to the presiding officer of 
that Court to be served or executed; and where any summons referred to in clause (a) or clause (c) has 
been so served, the provisions of section 68 shall apply in relation to such summons as if the 
presiding off icer of the Court to whom it is sent were a Magistrate in the said territories;  
(ii) in any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have been made by the 
Central Government with the Government of such country or place for service or  execution of 
summons or warrant in relation to criminal matters (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
contracting State), it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate in such form, directed to such 
Court, Judge or Magistrate, and send to such authority for transmission, as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.]  
(2) Where a Court in the said territories has received for service or execution — 
(a) a summons to an accused person, or  
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or  
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing, or to 
produce it, or  
(d) a search -warrant,  
3[issued by — 
(I) a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 13 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Added by s. 13 , ibid., (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 o f 1988, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f.  25-5-1988).  64 
 (II) a Court, Judg e or Magistrate in a contracting State,  
it shall cause the same to be served or executed] as if it were a summons or warrant received by it from 
another Court in the said territories for service or execution within its local jurisdiction; and where — 
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed by sections 80 and 81,  
 (ii) a search -warrant has been executed, the things found in the search shall, so far as p ossible, be dealt 
with in accordance with the procedure prescribed by section 101:  
1[Provided that in a case where a summons or search -warrant received from a contracting  State has been 
executed, the documents or things produced or things found in the sea rch shall be forwarded to the Court issuing the 
summons or search -warrant through such authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this 
behalf.]  
2[CHAPTER VIIA  
RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE  FOR 
ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY   
105A. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “contracting State ” means any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have 
been made by the Central Governme nt with the Government of such country through a treaty or otherwise;  
(b) “identifying ” includes establishment of a proof that the property was derived from, or used in, the 
commission of an offence;  
(c) “proceeds of crime ” means any property derived or ob tained directly or indirectly, by any person as a 
result of criminal activity (including crime involving currency transfers) or the value of any such property;  
(d) “property ” means property and assets of every description whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or 
immovable, tangible or intangible and deeds and instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or 
assets derived or used in the commission of an offence and includes property obtained through proceeds of 
crime;  
(e) “tracing ” mean s determining the nature, source, disposition, movement, title or ownership of property.  
105B. Assistance in securing transfer of persons .—(1) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal 
matter, desires that a warrant for arrest of any person to atte nd or produce a document or other thing issued by it 
shall be executed in any place in a contracting State, it shall send such warrant in duplicate in such form to such 
Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authority, as the Central Government may, by no tification, specify in this 
behalf and that Court, Judge or M agistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the same to be executed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, if, in the course of an investigation or any inquiry into an 
offence, an a pplication is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer 
that the attendance of a person who is in any place in a contracting State is required in connection with such 
investigation or inquiry and the Cou rt is satisfied that such attendance is so required, it shall issue a summons or 
warrant, in duplicate, against the said person to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, in such form as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, to caus e the same to be served or executed.  
(3) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, has received a warrant for arrest of any person 
requiring him to attend or attend and produce a document or other thing in that Court or before any other 
investigating agency, issued by a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State, the same shall be executed as if it 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 32 o f 1988 , s. 2, (w.e.f. 25 -5-1988).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -7-1994).  65 
 is the warrant received by it from another Court in India for execution within its local limits.  
(4) Where a person transferred to a contr acting State pursuant to sub -section (3) is a prisoner in India, the Court 
in India or the Central Government may impose such conditions as that Court or Government deems fit.  
(5) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) is a prisoner in a 
contracting State, the Court in India shall ensure that the conditions subject to which the prisoner is transferred to 
India are complied with and such prisoner shall be kept in such custody subject to such conditions as the Cen tral 
Government may direct in writing.  
105C. Assistance in relation to orders of attachment or forfeiture of property .—(1) Where a 
Court in India has reasonable grounds to believe that any property obtained by any person is derived or 
obtained, directly or  indirectly, by such person from the commission of an offence, it may make an order 
of attachment or forfeiture of such property, as it may deem fit under the provisions of sections 105D to 
105J (both inclusive).  
(2) Where the Court has made an order for a ttachment or forfeiture of any property under sub -section 
(1), and such property is suspected to be in a contracting State, the Court may issue a letter of request to a 
Court or an authority in the contracting State for execution of such order.  
(3) Where a  letter of request is received by the Central Government from a Court or an authority in a 
contracting State requesting attachment or forfeiture of the property in India, derived or obtained, directly 
or indirectly, by any person from the commission of an offence committed in that contracting State, the 
Central Government may forward such letter of request to the Court, as it thinks fit, for execution in 
accordance with the provisions of sections 105D to 105J (both inclusive) or, as the case may be, any oth er 
law for the time being in force.  
105D. Identifying unlawfully acquired property .—(1) The Court shall, under sub -section (1), or on 
receipt of a letter of request under sub -section (3) of section 105C, direct any police officer not below the 
rank of Sub -Inspector of Police to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property.  
(2) The steps referred to in sub -section (1) may include any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect 
of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in any bank or public financial 
institutions or any other relevant matters.  
(3) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub -section (2) shall be carried out by an officer 
mentioned in sub -section (1) in accordance with such directions i ssued by the said Court in this behalf.  
105E. Seizure or attachment of property .—(1) Where any officer conducting an inquiry or 
investigation under section 105D has a reason to believe that any property in relation to which such 
inquiry or investigation is  being conducted is likely to be concealed transferred or dealt with in any 
manner which will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing such property 
and where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an order o f attachment directing that 
such property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the prior permission of the 
officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served on the person concerned.  
(2) Any order made under sub -section (1) shall have no effect unless the said order is confirmed by an 
order of the said Court, within a period of thirty days of its being made.  
105F. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter .—(1) The Court may 
appoint the District  Magistrate of the area where the property is situated, or any other officer that may be 
nominated by the District Magistrate, to perform the functions of an Administrator of such property.  
(2) The Administrator appointed under sub -section (1) shall receiv e and manage the property in 
relation to which the order has been made under sub -section (1) of section 105E or under section 105H in 66 
 such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Central Government.  
(3) The Administrator shall also  take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to 
dispose of the property which is forfeited to the Central Government.  
105G. Notice of forfeiture of property .—(1) If as a result of the inquiry, investigation or survey 
under section 105D, the C ourt has reason to believe that all or any of such properties are proceeds of 
crime, it may serve a notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to as the person affected) calling upon 
him within a period of thirty days specified in the notice to indicate  the source of income, earnings or 
assets, out of which or by means of which he has acquired such property, the evidence on which he relies 
and other relevant information and particulars, and to show cause why all or any of such properties, as the 
case may  be, should not be declared to be proceeds of crime and forfeited to the Central Government.  
(2) Where a notice under sub -section (1) to any person specifies any property as being held on behalf 
of such person by any other person, a copy of the notice shal l also be served upon such other person.  
105H. Forfeiture of property in certain cases .—(1) The Court may, after considering the 
explanation, if any, to the show -cause notice issued under section 105G and the material available 
before it and after giving t o the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any 
property specified in the notice through any other person, to such other person also) a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the pro perties in question 
are proceeds of crime:  
Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property 
specified in the notice through any other person such other person also) does not appear before the 
Court or represe nt his case before it within a period of thirty days specified in the show -cause notice, 
the Court may proceed to record a finding under this sub -section ex parte  on the basis of evidence 
available before it.  
(2) Where the Court is satisfied that some of t he properties referred to in the show -cause notice 
are proceeds of crime but it is not possible to identify specifically such properties, then, it shall be 
lawful for the Court to specify the properties which, to the best of its judgment, are proceeds of c rime 
and record a finding accordingly under sub -section (1). 
(3) Where the Court records a finding under this section to the effect that any property is 
proceeds of crime, such property shall stand forfeited to the Central Government free from all 
encumbra nces.  
(4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government under this section, 
then, the company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) 
or the articles of association of the company, forthwit h register the Central Government as the 
transferee of such shares.  
105-I. Fine in lieu of forfeiture .—(1) Where the Court makes a declaration that any property 
stands forfeited to the Central Government under section 105H and it is a case where the source  of 
only a part of such property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the Court, it shall make an 
order giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine equal to the market 
value of such part.  
(2) Before making an order i mposing a fine under sub -section (1), the person affected shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Where the person affected pays the fine due under sub -section (1), within such time as may 
be allowed in that behalf, the Court may, by or der, revoke the declaration of forfeiture under section 
105H and thereupon such property shall stand released.  
105J. Certain transfers to be null and void. —Where after the making of an order under sub -
section (1) of section 105E or the issue of a notice un der section 105G, any property referred to in the 67 
 said order or notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfers shall, for the purposes of 
the proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited to the 
Cent ral Government under section 105H, then, the transfer of such property shall be deemed to be 
null and void.  
105K. Procedure in respect of letter of request. —Every letter of request, summons or warrant, 
received by the Central Government from, and every let ter of request, summons or warrant, to be 
transmitted to a contracting State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as 
the case may be, sent to the concerned Court in India in such form and in such manner as the Central 
Governme nt may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  
105L. Application of this Chapter. —The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that the application of this Chapter in relation to a contracting State with 
which reciprocal ar rangements have been made, shall be subject to such conditions, exceptions or 
qualifications as are specified in the said notification.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
106. Security for keeping the peace on conviction .—(1) When a Court of Session or Court of a Magistrate of 
the first class convicts a person of any of the offences specified in sub -section (2) or of abetting any such offence 
and is of opinion that it is necessary to take security from such person for keepin g the peace, the Court may, at the 
time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace 
for such period, not exceeding three years, as it thinks fit.  
(2) The offences referred to in sub -section (1) are— 
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VIII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), other than an offence 
punishable under section 153A or section 153B or section 154 thereof;  
(b) any offence which consists of, or includes, assault or using cr iminal force or committing mischief;  
(c) any offence of criminal intimidation;  
(d) any other offence which caused, or was intended or known to be likely to cause, a breach of the peace.  
(3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the bond so  executed shall become void.  
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by a Court when exercising its 
powers of revision.  
107. Security for keeping the peace in other cases .—(1) When an Executive Magistrate receives informat ion 
that any person is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any wrongful act 
that may probably occasion a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity and is of opinion that there is 
sufficient ground  for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause 
why he should not be ordered to execute a bond 1[with or without sureties,] for keeping the peace for such period, 
not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thin ks fit.  
(2) Proceedings under this section may be taken before any Executive Magistrate when either the place where 
the breach of the peace or disturbance is apprehended is within his local jurisdiction or there is within such 
jurisdiction a person who is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any 
wrongful act as aforesaid beyond such jurisdiction.  
108. Security for good behaviour from persons disseminating seditious matters .—(1) When 2[an Executive 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 11 ( w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
2. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 2, for “a Judicial Magistrate  of the first class” ( w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  68 
 Magistrate]  r eceives information that there is within his local jurisdiction any person who, within or without such 
jurisdiction, — 
(i) either orally or in writing or in any other manner, intentionally disseminates or attempts to disseminate 
or abets the dissemination o f,— 
(a) any matter the publication of which is punishable under section 124A or section 153A or section 
153B  or section 295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or  
(b) any matter concerning a Judge acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his of ficial duties 
which amounts to criminal intimidation or defamation under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),  
(ii) makes, produces, publishes or keeps for sale, imports, exports, conveys, sells, lets to hire,                   
distributes, publicly exhibits  or in any other manner puts into circulation any obscene matter such as is referred 
to in section 292 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),  
and the Magistrate is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate may, in the manner  
hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with or 
without sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.  
 (2) No proceedings shall be ta ken under this section against the editor, proprietor, printer or publisher of any 
publication registered under, and edited, printed and published in conformity with, the rules laid down in the Press 
and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867), with r eference to any matter contained in such publication except 
by the order or under the authority of the State Government or some officer empowered by the State Government in 
this behalf.  
109. Security for good behaviour from suspected persons. —When 1[an Exe cutive Magistrate]  receives 
information that there is within his local jurisdiction a person taking precautions to conceal his presence and that 
there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in 
the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, 
with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.  
110. Security  for good behaviour from habitual offenders. —When 1[an Executive Magistrate]  receives 
information that there is within his local jurisdiction a person who —  
(a) is by habit a robber, house -breaker, thief, or forger, or  
(b) is by habit a receiver of stolen  property knowing the same to have been stolen, or  
(c) habitually protects or harbours thieves, or aids in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, or  
(d) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, the offence of kidnappi ng, 
abduction, extortion, cheating or mischief, or any offence punishable under Chapter XII of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), or under section 489A, section 489B, section 489C or section 489D of that Code, or  
(e) habitually commits, or attempts to com mit, or abets the commission of, offences, involving a breach of 
the peace, or  
(f) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of — 
(i) any offence under one or more of the following Acts, namely: — 
(a)  the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 19 40 (23 of 1940);  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 2, for “a Judicial Magistrate  of the first class” (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  69 
 1[(b) the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973);]  
(c) the Employees’ Provident Fund 2[and Family Pension Fund] Act, 1952 (19 of 1952);  
(d) the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954);  
(e) the Essential Commoditi es Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);  
(f) the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 (22 of 1955);  
(g) the Cu stoms Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); 3*** 
4[(h) the Foreigners Act, 1946  (31 of 1946) ; or] 
(ii) any offence punishable under any other law providing for the prevention of hoarding or 
profiteering or of adulteration of food or drugs or of corruption, or  
(g) is so desperate and dangerous to render his being at large without security hazardous to the community,  
such Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, requi re such person to show cause why he should not be 
ordered to execute a bond, with sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding three years, as the 
Magistrate thinks fit.  
111. Order to be made. —When a Magistrate acting under section 107, section 108, section 109 or section 110, 
deems it necessary to require any person to show cause under such section, he shall make an order in writing, setting 
forth the substance of the information received, the amount of the bond to be executed, the term for which it is to be 
in force, and the number, character and class of sureties (if any) required.  
112. Procedure in respect of person present in Court. —If the person in respect of whom such order is made 
is present in Court, it shall be read over to him, or, if he so desires, the substance thereof shall be explained to him.  
113. Summons or warrant in case of person not so present. —If such person is not present in Court, the 
Magistrate shall issue a summons requiring him to appear, or, when such person is i n custody, a warrant directing 
the officer in whose custody he is to bring him before the Court:  
Provided that whenever it appears to such Magistrate, upon the report of a police officer or upon other 
information (the substance of which report or informati on shall be recorded by the Magistrate), that there is reason 
to fear the commission of a breach of the peace, and that such breach of the peace cannot be prevented otherwise 
than by the immediate arrest of such person, the Magistrate may at any time issue  a warrant for his arrest.  
114. Copy of order to accompany summons or warrant. —Every summons or warrant issued under                 
section 113 shall be accompanied by a copy of the order made under section 111, and such copy shall be delivered 
by the off icer serving or executing such summons or warrant to the person served with, or arrested under, the same.  
115. Power to dispense with personal attendance. —The Magistrate may, if he sees sufficient cause, dispense 
with the personal attendance of any person called upon to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a 
bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour and may permit him to appear by a pleader.  
116. Inquiry as to truth of information. —(1) When an order under section 111 has been read or ex plained 
under section 112 to a person present in Court, or when any person appears or is brought before a Magistrate in 
compliance with, or in execution of, a summons or warrant, issued under section 113, the Magistrate shall proceed 
to inquire into the tr uth of the information upon which action has been taken, and to take such further evidence as 
may appear necessary.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for item ( b) (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).  
2. Ins. by s. 3 and the Second Sch., ibid. (w.e. f. 10-1-1975).  
3. The word “or” omitted by Act 25 of 2005, s. 14 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  70 
 (2) Such inquiry shall be made, as nearly as may be practicable, in the manner hereinafter prescribed for 
conducting trial and recording evi dence in summons -cases.  
(3) After the commencement, and before the completion, of the inquiry under sub -section (1), the Magistrate, 
if he considers that immediate measures are necessary for the prevention of a breach of the peace or disturbance 
of the pub lic tranquillity or the commission of any offence or for the public safety, may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, direct the person in respect of whom the order under section 111 has been made to execute a 
bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour until the conclusion of the 
inquiry, and may detain him in custody until such bond is executed or, in default of execution, until the inquiry is 
concluded:  
Provided that — 
(a) no person against whom proceedings are no t being taken under section 108, section 109, or section 110 
shall be directed to execute a bond for maintaining good behaviour;  
(b) the conditions of such bond, whether as to  the amount thereof or as to the provision of sureties or the 
number thereof or t he pecuniary extent of their liability, shall not be more onerous than those specified in the 
order under section 111.  
(4) For the purposes of this section the fact that a person is an habitual offender or is so desperate and dangerous 
as to render his bei ng at large without security hazardous to the community may be proved by evidence of general 
repute or otherwise.  
(5) Where two or more persons have been associated together in the matter under inquiry, they may be dealt 
within the same or separate inquiri es as the Magistrate shall think just.  
(6) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of six months from the date of its 
commencement, and if such inquiry is not so completed, the proceedings under this Chapter shall, on the expiry o f 
the said period, stand terminated unless, for special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise 
directs:  
Provided that where any person has been kept in detention pending such inquiry, the proceeding against that 
person, unless terminat ed earlier, shall stand terminated on the expiry of a period of six months of such detention.  
(7) Where any direction is made under sub -section (6) permitting the continuance of proceedings the Sessions 
Judge may, on an application made to him by the aggri eved party, vacate such direction if he is satisfied that it was 
not based on any special reason or was perverse.  
117. Order to give security. —If, upon such inquiry, it is proved that it is necessary for keeping the peace or 
maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made should 
execute a bond, with or without sureties, the Magistrate shall make an order accordingly:  
Provided that — 
(a) no person shall be ordered to give security of a nature different fr om, or of an amount larger than, or for 
a period longer than, that specified in the order made under section 111;  
(b) the amount of every bond shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not 
be excessive;  
(c) when the person i n respect of whom the inquiry is made is a minor, the bond shall be executed only by 
his sureties.  
118. Discharge of person informed against. —If, on an inquiry under section 116, it is not proved that it is 
necessary for keeping the peace or maintaining go od behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of 
whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond, the Magistrate shall make an entry on the record to that effect, 
and if such person is in custody only for the purposes of the inquiry, shall r elease him, or, if such person is not in 
custody, shall discharge him.  
119. Commencement of period for which security is required. —(1) If any person, in respect of whom an 
order requiring security is made under section 106 or section 117, is at the time su ch order is made, sentenced to, or 71 
 undergoing a sentence of, imprisonment, the period for which such security is required shall commence on the 
expiration of such sentence.  
(2) In other cases such period shall commence on the date of such order unless the Magistrate, for sufficient 
reason, fixes a later date.  
120. Contents of bond. —The bond to be executed by any such person shall bind him to keep the peace or to be 
of good behaviour, as the case may be, and in the latter case the commission or attempt to co mmit, or the abetment 
of, any offence punishable with imprisonment, wherever it may be committed, is a breach of the bond.  
121. Power to reject sureties. —(1) A Magistrate may refuse to accept any surety offered, or may reject any 
surety previously accepted  by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground that such surety is an unfit 
person for the purposes of the bond:  
Provided that, before so refusing to accept or rejecting any such surety, he shall either himself hold an inquiry 
on oath into the  fitness of the surety, or cause such inquiry to be held and a report to be made thereon by a 
Magistrate subordinate to him.  
(2) Such Magistrate shall, before holding the inquiry, give reasonable notice to the surety and to the person by 
whom the surety wa s offered and shall, in making the inquiry, record the substance of the evidence adduced before 
him. 
(3) If the Magistrate is satisfied, after considering the evidence so adduced either before him or before a 
Magistrate deputed under sub -section (1), and t he report of such Magistrate (if any), that the surety is an unfit person 
for the purposes of the bond, he shall make an order refusing to accept or rejecting, as the case may be, such surety 
and recording his reasons for so doing:  
Provided that, before ma king an order rejecting any surety who has previously been accepted, the Magistrate 
shall issue his summons or warrant, as he thinks fit, and cause the person for whom the surety is bound to appear or 
to be brought before him.  
122. Imprisonment in default of security. —(1) (a) If any person ordered to give security under section 106 or 
section 117 does not give such security on or before the date on which the period for which such security is to be 
given commences, he shall, except in the case next hereinaft er mentioned, be committed to prison, or, if he is 
already in prison, be detained in prison until such period expires or until within such period he gives the security to 
the Court or Magistrate who made the order requiring it.  
(b) If any person after havi ng executed a 1[bond , with or without sureties] without sureties for keeping the peace 
in pursuance of an order of a Magistrate under section 117, is proved, to the satisfaction of such Magistrate or his 
successor -in-office, to have committed breach of the  bond, such Magistrate or successor -in-office may, after 
recording the grounds of such proof, order that the person be arrested and detained in prison until the expiry of the 
period of the bond and such order shall be without prejudice to any other punishm ent or forfeiture to which the said 
person may be liable in accordance with law.  
(2) When such person has been ordered by a Magistrate to give security for a period exceeding one year, such 
Magistrate shall, if such person does not give such security as af oresaid, issue a warrant directing him to be detained 
in prison pending the orders of the Sessions Judge and the proceedings shall be laid, as soon as conveniently may be, 
before such Court.  
(3) Such Court, after examining such proceedings and requiring fr om the Magistrate any further information or 
evidence which it thinks necessary, and after giving the concerned person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
may pass such order on the case as it thinks fit:  
Provided that the period (if any) for which an y person is imprisoned for failure to give security shall not exceed 
three years.  
(4) If security has been required in the course of the same proceeding from two or more persons in respect                  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 15, for “bond without sureties” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  72 
 of any one of whom the proceedings are referred to the Sessions Judge under sub -section (2) such reference shall 
also include the case of any other of such persons who has been order to give security, and the provisions of                  
sub-sections (2) and (3) shall, in that event, apply to the case of  such other person also, except that the period (if 
any) for which he may be imprisoned, shall not exceed the period for which he was ordered to give security.  
(5) A Sessions Judge may in his discretion transfer any proceedings laid before him under sub -section (2) or 
sub-section (4) to an Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge and upon such transfer, such Additional 
Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge may exercise the powers of a Sessions Judge under this section in 
respect of such pr oceedings.  
(6) If the security is tendered to the officer in charge of the jail, he shall forthwith refer the matter to the Court 
or Magistrate who made the order, and shall await the orders of such Court or Magistrate.  
(7) Imprisonment for failure to give  security for keeping the peace shall be simple.  
(8) Imprisonment for failure to give security for good behaviour shall, where the proceedings have been taken 
under section 108, be simple, and, where the proceedings have been taken under section 109 or sec tion 110, be 
rigorous or simple as the Court or Magistrate in each case directs.  
123. Power to release persons imprisoned for failing to give security .—(1) Whenever 1[the District 
Magistrate in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under s ection 117, or the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate in any other case] is of opinion that any person imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter 
may be released without hazard to the community or to any other person, he may order such person to be 
discharged.  
(2) Whenever any person has been imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter, the High Court or 
Court of Session, or, where the order was made by any other Court, 2[District Magistrate, in the case of an order 
passed by an Execut ive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case], may make 
an order reducing the amount of the security or the number of sureties or the time for which security has been 
required.  
(3) An order under sub -section (1) may direct the discharge of such person either without conditions or upon 
any conditions which such person accepts:  
Provided that any condition imposed shall cease to be operative when the period for which such person was 
ordered to give security has expired.  
(4) The State Government may prescribe the conditions upon which a conditional discharge may be made.  
(5) If any condition upon which any person has been discharged is, in the opinion of 2[District Magistrate, in the 
case of an order passed by an Executive  Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other 
case] by whom the order of discharge was made or of his successor, not fulfilled, he may cancel the same.  
(6) When a conditional order of discharge has been cancelled under sub -section (5), such person may be 
arrested by any police officer without warrant, and shall thereupon be produced before  the 2[District Magistrate, in 
the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in  any 
other case].  
(7) Unless such person gives security in accordance with the terms of the original order for the unexpired 
portion of the term for which he was in the first instance committed  or ordered to be detained (such portion being 
deemed to be a period equal to the period between the date of the breach  of the conditions of discharge and the date 
on which, except for such conditional discharge, he would have been entitled to release), 2[District Magistrate, in the 
case of an order  passed by an Exe cutive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other 
case] may remand such person to prison to undergo such unexpired portion.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 12, for “the Chief Judicial Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid., for “Chief Judicial Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  73 
 (8) A person remanded to prison under sub -section (7) shall, subject to the provisions of section 1 22, be 
released at any time on giving security in accordance with the terms of the original order for the unexpired portion 
aforesaid to the Court or Magistrate by whom such order was made, or to its or his successor.  
(9) The High Court or Court of Session  may at any time, for sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing, cancel 
any bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour executed under this Chapter by any order made by it, and 
1[District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive M agistrate under section 117, or the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate in any other case] may make such cancellation where such bond was executed under his order or 
under the order of any other Court in his district.  
(10) Any surety for the peaceable conduct or goo d behaviour of another person ordered to execute a bond under 
this Chapter may at any time apply to the Court making such order to cancel the bond and on such application being 
made, the Court shall issue a summons or warrant, as it thinks fit, requiring t he person for whom such surety is bond 
appear or to be brought before it.  
124. Security for unexpired period of bond .—(1) When a person for whose appearance a summons or warrant 
has been issued under the proviso to sub -section (3) of section 121 or under s ub-section (10) of section 123, appears 
or is brought before the Magistrate or Court, the Magistrate or Court shall cancel the bond executed by such person 
and shall order such person to give, for the unexpired portion of the term of such bond, fresh secur ity of the same 
description as the original security.  
(2) Every such order shall, for the purposes of sections 120 to 123 (both inclusive) be deemed to be an order 
made under section 106 or section 117, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER IX  
ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS  
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents .—(1) If any person having sufficient means 
neglects or refuses to maintain — 
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or  
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child , whether married or not, unable to maintain itself, or  
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has attained majority, where such 
child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury unable to maintain its elf, or  
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,  
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly 
allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or moth er, at such monthly rate 1*** as such 
Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:  
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child referred to in clause (b) to make such 
allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if 
married, is not possessed of sufficient means:  
2[Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding regar ding monthly allowance 
for the maintenance under this sub -section, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim 
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the Magistrate 
considers rea sonable, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:  
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of 
proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as possibl e, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of the 
                                                 
1. Certain words omitted by Act 50 of 2001, s. 2  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  74 
 service of notice of the application to such person.]  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this Chapter, — 
(a) “minor ” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875)  is 
deemed not to have attained his majority;  
(b) “wife” includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband and 
has not remarried.  
1[(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proce eding shall be 
payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or interim 
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.]  
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to co mply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for 
every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and 
may sentence such person, for the whole or any part of each month’s 2[allowance for the ma intenance or the interim 
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,] remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, 
to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if sooner made:  
Provided that no warrant sh all be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this section unless application 
be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of one year from the date on which it became due:  
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wi fe on condition of her living with him, and she 
refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order 
under this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground f or so doing.  
Explanation .—If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be 
considered to be just ground for his wife’s refusal to live with him.  
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an 2[allowance for the mainten ance or the interim maintenance and 
expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,] from her husband under this section if she is living in adultery, or if, 
without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if they are living separately by mutual 
consent.  
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this section in living in adultery,  or 
that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or that they are living separately by mutual 
consent , the Magistrate shall cancel the order.  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 125 .— In sub -section ( 1) of section 125 of the  Principal Act, for the words “five 
hundred rupees ” the words “three thousand rupees ” shall be substituted  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act, 10 of 1998, s. 3.]  
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 125 .— In section 125 of the principal Act, — 
(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, namely :— 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 2, for sub -section (2) (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
2. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for “allowance” (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001)  75 
 “Order for maintenance of wives, children, parents a nd grand parents. ” 
(ii) In sub -section ( 1), — 
(a) after clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted , namely:  — 
“(e) his grand father, grand mother unable to maintain himself or her self. ”; 
(b) In the existing para, for the words “a Magistrate of the  first class may, upon proof of such neglect or 
refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or 
mother at such monthly rate not exceeding three thousand rupees in the whole, as such Magistrate  thinks fit, and 
to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate   may from time to time direct ”, the words “a Magistrate of the 
first class may upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the 
maintenance of his  wife or such child, father, mother, grand father, grand mother at such monthly rate, as such 
Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct ” shall be 
substituted ; 
(c) After the existing first provi so, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 
“Provided further that the relatives in clause ( e) shall only be entitled to monthly allowance for maintenance 
if their sons daughters are not alive and they are unable to maintain themselves. ” 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 2004, s. 3.]  
West Bengal  
In Sub -section ( 1) of section 125 of the Principal Act,  — 
(1) for the words “five hundred rupees”, the words “one thousand and five hundred rupees” shall be 
substituted;  
(2) after the existing proviso, the fo llowing proviso shall be inserted: — 
“Provided further that where in any proceeding under this section it appears to the Magistrate that 
the wife referred to in clause ( a) or the minor child referred to in clause ( b) or the child (not being a 
married daught er) referred to in clause ( c) or the father or the mother referred to in clause ( d) is in 
need of immediate relief for her or its or his support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, the 
Magistrate may, on the application of the wife or the minor c hild or the child (not being a married 
daughter) or the father or the mother, as the case may be, order the person against whom the allowance 
for maintenance is claimed, to pay to the petitioner, pending the conclusion of the proceeding, the 
expenses of th e proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such allowance as, having regard to 
the income of such person, it may seem to the Magistrate co be reasonable .”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act, 25 of  1992, s. 4 ] 
West Bengal  
In sub -section ( 1) of section 125 of the p rincipal Act, as amended by the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(West Bengal Amendment) Act, 1992, the words “not exceeding one thousand and five hundred rupees” 
the proviso shall be omitted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 33 of 2001, s. 3]  76 
 Maharashtra  
Amendment of se ction 125 of Act 2 of 1974 .—In Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as “the said Code”), -  
(a) in sub -section ( 1),- 
(i) for the words “not exceeding five hundred rupees ” the words “not exceeding fifteen hundred 
rupees” shall be substituted;  
(ii) before the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: -  
“Provided that, the Magistrate, on an application or submission being made, supported by an affida vit 
by the person who has applied for the maintenance under this sub -section, for payment of interim 
maintenance, on being satisfied that, there is a prima facie ground for making such order, may direct the 
person against whom the application for maintenan ce has been made, to pay a reasonable amount by way 
of interim maintenance to the applicant, pending the final disposal of the maintenance application:  
Provided further that, such order for payment of interim maintenance may, in an appropriate case, 
also b e made by the Magistrate ex-parte , pending service of notice of the application subject, however, to 
the condition that such an order shall be liable to be modified or even cancelled after the respondent is 
heard in the matter:  
Provided also that, subject to the ceiling laid down under this sub -section, the amount of interim 
maintenance shall, as far as practicable, be not less than thirty per cent. of the monthly income of the 
respondent:  
(iii) in the existing proviso, for the words “Provided that” the wor ds “Provided also that” shall be 
substituted;  
(b) after sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“(2A) Notwithstanding anything otherwise contained in sub -sections (1) and (2), where an application 
is made by the wife under cl ause (a) of sub -section (1) for the maintenance allowance, the applicant may 
also seek relief that the order may be made for the payment of monthly maintenance allowance, and the 
Magistrate may, after taking into consideration all the circumstances obtaini ng in the case including the 
factors like the age, physical condition, economic conditions and other liabilities and commitments of 
both the parties, pass an order that the respondent shall pay the maintenance allowance in lumpsum in lieu 
of the monthly ma intenance allowance, covering a specified period, not exceeding five years at a time, or 
for such period which may exceed five years, as may be mutually agreed to, by the parties.”;  
(c) in sub -section (3), — 
(i) after the words “so ordered” the words, brack ets, figures and letter “either under sub -section 
(1) or sub -section (2A), as the case may be,” shall be inserted;  
(ii) after the words “each months allowance” the words “or, as the case may be, the lump -sum 
allowance to be paid in lieu of the monthly allo wance” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 21 of 1999, s. 2]  77 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act — 
(a) in sub -section (1), for the words “five hundred only” the words “fiv e thousand only” shall 
be substituted . 
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub -section shall be inserted,  namely : — 
“(6) Where in a proceeding under this section it appears to the Magistrate that the person claiming 
maintenance is in need of immediate  relief for his support and the necessary expenses of the 
proceeding, the Magistrate may, in his application, order the person against whom the maintenance is 
claimed, to pay to the person claiming the maintenance, during the pendency of the proceeding suc h 
monthly allowance not exceeding five thousand rupees and such expenses of the proceeding as the 
Magistrate consider reasonable and such order shall be enforceable as an order of maintenance.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 36 of 2000, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
In sec tion 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh 
hereinafter referred to as the principal Act in sub -section (6) the words “not exceeding five thousand 
rupees” shall be omitted . 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 15 of 2 011, s. 2]  
126.  Procedure. —(1) Proceedings under section 125 may be taken against any person in any district — 
(a) where he is, or  
(b) where he or his wife resides, or  
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate child.  
(2) All evidence in such proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the person against whom an order for 
payment of maintenance is proposed to be made, or, when his personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence 
of his pleade r, and shall be recorded in the manner prescribed  for summons -cases:  
Provided that if the  Magistrate is  satisfied that the person against whom an order for payment of maintenanc e 
is proposed to be made is wilfully avoiding service, or wil fully neglecti ng to attend the Court, the Magistrate may  
proceed to hear and determine the case ex parte  and any order so made may be set aside for good cause shown on an 
application made  within three months  from the date thereof subject to such terms including terms  as to payment of 
costs to the opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and proper.  
(3) The Court in dealing with applications under section 125 shall have power to make such order as to costs as 
may be just.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh and Telan gana  
Amendment of section 126 -In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) 
in section 126, in sub -section (1), for clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely: - 
“(b) where he or his wife resides, or wher e his parents or children resides, or;”  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 18 of 2007, s. 2]  
127. Alteration in allowance .—1[(1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving, under 
section 125 a monthly allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance, or ordered under the same section to 
pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, or interim maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as the 
case may be, the Magistrate may make such alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for  the maintenance or the 
interim mainte nance, as the case may be.]  
(2) Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in consequence of any decision of a competent Civil Court, any 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 50 of 2001 , s. 3, for sub -section (1) (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  78 
 order made under section 125 should be cancelled or varied, he shall cancel the or der or, as the case may be, vary 
the same accordingly.  
(3) Where any order has been made under section 125 in favour of a woman who has been divorced by, or has 
obtained a divorce from, her husband, the Magistrate shall, if he is satisfied that — 
(a) the wo man has, after the date of such divorce, remarried, cancel such order as from the date of her 
remarriage;  
(b) the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has received, whether before or after the date 
of the said order, the whole of the sum whi ch, under any customary or personal law applicable to the parties, 
was payable on such divorce, cancel such order, —  
(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order, from the date on which such order was 
made ; 
(ii) in any other case, from the dat e of expiry of the period, if any, for which maintenance has been 
actually paid by the husband to the woman;  
(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that she had voluntarily surrendered her rights 
to 1[maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case may be,] after her divorce, cancel the order from the date 
thereof.  
(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry by any person, to whom a 
2[monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or a ny of them has been ordered] to be paid 
under section 125, the Civil Court shall take into account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered by, such 
person 3[as monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or  any of them, as the case may be, in 
pursuance of ] the said order.  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of section  127.—In sub -section ( 1) of section 127 of the principal Act, for the words 
“father or mother ”, the words “father, mother, grand father, grand mother ” shall be su bstituted.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 2004, s. 4]  
West Bengal  
In the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 127 of the principal Act, for the words “five hundred 
rupees”, the words “one thousand and five hundred rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 14 of 1995, s. 3]  
West Bengal  
In Sub -section ( 1) of section 127 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 33 of 2001, s. 4]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 127 of Act (2 of 1974). —In section 127 of the said Code, - (a) in sub -section 
(1), in the proviso, for the words “five hundred rupees” the words “fifteen hundred rupees” shall be 
substitute; (b) in sub -section (4), - 
(i) for the words “monthly allowance”, where they occur for the first time, the words 
“maint enance allowance” shall be substituted;  
(ii) after the words “monthly allowance”, where they occur for the second time, the words “or, 
as the case may be, the lump -sum allowance” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 21 of 1999, s. 3]  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 3 , for “maintenance”  (w.e.f. 24-9-2001).  
2. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for “monthly allowance has been ordered” (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “monthly allowance in pursuance of ” (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001) . 79 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 127 of the principal Act, sub -section (1), in the proviso for the words “five hundred rupees” 
the words “five thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 36 of 2000, s. 3]  
128. Enforcement of order of maintenance. —A copy of the or der of 1[maintenance or interim maintenance 
and expenses of proceeding s, as the case may be,] shall be given without payment to the person in whose favour it is 
made, or to his guardian, if any, or to the person to 2[whom the allowance for the maintenance or the allowance for 
the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding , as the case may be,] is to be paid; and such order may be 
enforced by any Magistrate in any place where the person against whom it is made may be, on  such Magistrate 
being satisfied as to the  identity of the parties and the non -payment of the 3[allowance, or as the case may be, 
expenses, due].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 128 .—In section 128 of the principal Act, the expression “where the person 
against whom it is made, may be,” shall be omitted.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 18 of 2007, s. 3]    
CHAPTER X  
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY  
A.—Unlawful assemblies  
129. Dispersal of assembly by use of civil force .—(1) Any Executive Magistrate or  officer in charge of a 
police station or, in the absence of such officer in charge, any police officer, not below  the rank of a sub -inspector, 
may command any unlawful assembly, or any assembly of five or more persons likely to cause a disturbance of the 
public peace, to disperse; and it shall thereupon be the duty of the members of such assembly to disperse 
accordingly.  
(2) If, upon being so commanded, any such assembly does not disperse, or if, without being so commanded, it 
conducts itself in such a man ner as to show a determination not to disperse, any Executive Magistrate or police 
officer referred to in sub -section (1), may proceed to disperse such assembly by force, and may require the 
assistance of any male person, not being an officer or member of the armed forces and acting as such, for the 
purpose of dispersing such assembly, and, if necessary, arresting and confining the persons who form part of it, in 
order to disperse such assembly or that they may be punished according to law.  
130. Use of arme d forces to disperse assembly .—(1) If any such assembly cannot be otherwise dispersed, and 
if it is necessary for the public security that it should be dispersed, the Executive Magistrate of the highest rank who 
is present may cause it to be dispersed by t he armed forces.  
(2) Such Magistrate may require any officer in command of any group of persons belonging to the armed forces 
to disperse the assembly with the help of the armed forces under his command, and to arrest and confine such 
persons forming part of it as the Magistrate may direct, or as it may be necessary to arrest and confine in order to 
disperse the assembly or to have them punished according to law.  
(3) Every such officer of the armed forces shall obey such requisition in such manner as he thi nks fit, but in so 
doing he shall use as little force, and do as little injury to person and property, as may be consistent with dispersing 
the assembly and arresting and detaining such persons.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by   Act 50 of 2001, s. 4, for “maintenance”  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid.,  for “whom the allowance”  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid.,  for “allowance due”  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
 80 
 131. Power of certain armed force officers to disperse assemb ly.—When the public security is manifestly 
endangered by any such assembly and no Executive Magistrate can be communicated with, any commissioned or 
gazetted officer of the armed forces may disperse such assembly with the help of the armed forces under his  
command, and may arrest and confine any person s forming part of it, in order to disperse such assembly or that they 
may be punished according to law; but if, while he is acting under this section, it becomes practicable for him to 
communicate with an Exec utive Magistrate, he shall do so, and shall thenceforward obey the instructions of the 
Magistrate, as to whether he shall or shall not continue such action.  
132. Protection against prosecution for acts done under preceding sections .—(1) No prosecution agai nst 
any person for any act purporting to be done under section 129, section 130 or section 131 shall be instituted in any 
Criminal Court except — 
(a) with the sanction of the Central Government where such person is an officer or member of the armed 
forces;  
(b) with the sanction of the State Government in any other case.  
(2) (a) No Executive Magistrate or police officer acting under any of the said sections in good faith;  
(b) no person doing any act in good faith in compliance with a requisition under section  129 or section 130;  
(c) no officer of the armed forces acting under section 131 in good faith;  
(d) no member of the armed forces doing any act in obedience to any order which he was bound to obey,  
shall be deemed to have thereby committed an offence.  
(3) In this section and in the preceding sections of this Chapter, — 
(a) the expression “armed forces ” means the military, naval and air forces, operating as land forces and 
includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating;  
(b) “officer ”, in relation t o the armed forces, means a person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as an officer 
of the armed forces and includes a junior commissioned officer, a warrant officer, a petty officer, a non -
commissioned officer and a non -gazetted officer;  
(c) “member ”, in re lation to the armed forces, means a person in the armed forces other than an officer.  
B.—Public nuisances  
133. Conditional order for removal of nuisance .—(1) Whenever a District Magistrate or a Sub -divisional 
Magistrate or any other  Executive  Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government, on 
receiving the report of a police officer or other information and on taking such evidence (if any) as he thinks fit, 
considers — 
(a) that any unlawful obstruction or nuisance should be removed f rom any public place or from any way, 
river or channel which is or may be lawfully used by the public; or  
(b) that the conduct of any trade or occupation, or the keeping of any goods or merchandise, is injurious to 
the health or physical comfort of the com munity, and that in consequence such trade or occupation should be 
prohibited or regulated or such goods or merchandise should be removed or the keeping thereof regulated; or  
(c) that the construction of any building, or, the disposal of any substance, as is likely to occasion 81 
 configuration or explosion, should be prevented or stopped; or  
(d) that any building, tent or structure, or any tree is in such a condition that it is likely to fall and thereby 
cause injury to persons living or carrying on business i n the neighbourhood or passing by, and that in 
consequence the removal, repair or support of such building, tent or structure, or the removal or support of such 
tree, is necessary; or  
(e) that any tank, well or excavation adjacent to any such way or public  place should be fenced in such  
manner as to prevent danger arising to the public; or  
(f) that any dangerous animal should be destroyed, confined or otherwise disposed of,  
such Magistrate may make a conditional order requiring the person causing such obst ruction or nuisance, or carrying 
on such trade or occupation, or keeping any such goods or merchandise, or owning, possessing or controlling such 
building, tent, structure, substance, tank, well or excavation, or owning or possessing such animal or tree, w ithin a 
time to be fixed in the order — 
(i) to remove such obstruction or nuisance; or  
(ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or regulate in such manner as may be directed, such trade or 
occupation, or to remove such goods or merchandise, or to regul ate the keeping thereof in such manner as may 
be directed; or  
(iii) to prevent or stop the construction of such building, or to alter the disposal of such substance; or  
(iv) to remove, repair or support such building, tent or structure, or to remove or sup port such trees; or  
(v) to fence such tank, well or excavation; or  
(vi) to destroy, confine or dispose of such dangerous animal in the manner provided in the said order,  
or, if he objects so to do, to appear before himself or some other Executive Magistrat e subordinate to him at a time 
and place to be fixed by the order, and show cause, in the manner hereinafter provided, why the order should not be 
made absolute.  
(2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this section shall be called in question in any C ivil Court.  
Explanation .—A “public place ” includes also property belonging to the State, camping grounds and grounds 
left unoccupied for sanitary or recreative purposes.  
134. Service or notification of order .—(1) The order shall, if practicable, be served on the person against 
whom it is made, in the manner herein provided for service of a summons.  
(2) If such order cannot be so served, it shall be notified by proclamation, published in such manner as the State 
Government may, by rules, direct, and a copy t hereof shall be struck up at such place or places as may be fittest for 
conveying the information to such person.  
135. Person to whom order is addressed to obey or show cause .—The person against whom such order is 
made shall — 
(a) perform, within the time a nd in the manner specified in the order, the act directed thereby; or  
(b) appear in accordance with such order and show cause against the same.  
136. Consequences of his failing to do so .—If such person does not perform such act or appear and show 
cause, he  shall be liable to the penalty prescribed in that behalf in section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
and the order shall be made absolute.  82 
 137. Procedure where existence of public right is denied .—(1) Where an order is made under section 133 fo r 
the purpose of preventing obstruction, nuisance or danger to the public in the use of any way, river, channel or place, 
the Magistrate shall, on the appearance before him of the person against whom the order was made, question him as 
to whether he denies  the existence of  any public right in respect of the way, river, channel or place, and if he does 
so, the Magistrate shall, before proceeding under section 138, inquire into the matter.  
(2) If in such inquiry the Magistrate finds that there is any reliab le evidence in support of such denial, he shall 
stay the proceedings until the matter of the existence of such right has been decided by a competent Court; and, if he 
finds that there is no such evidence, he shall proceed as laid down in section 138.  
(3) A person who has, on being questioned by the Magistrate under sub -section ( 1), failed to deny the existence 
of a public right of the nature therein referred to, or who, having made such denial, has failed to adduce reliable 
evidence in support thereof, shal l not in the subsequent proceedings be permitted to make any such denial.  
138. Procedure where he appears to show cause .—(1) If the person against whom an order under section 133 
is made appears and shows cause against the order, the Magistrate shall take evidence in the matter as in a 
summons -case.  
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the order, either as originally made or subject to such modification as he 
considers necessary, is reasonable and proper, the order shall be made absolute without modifica tion or, as the case 
may be, with such modification.  
(3) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, no further proceedings shall be taken in the case.  
139. Power of Magistrate to direct local investigation and examination of an expert. —The Magistrate may, 
for the purposes of an inquiry under section 137 or section 138 — 
(a) direct a local investigation to be made by such person as he thinks fit; or  
(b) summon and examine an expert.  
140. Power of Magistrate to furnish written instructions, etc .—(1) Where the Magi strate directs a local 
investigation by any person under section 139, the Magistrate may — 
(a) furnish such person with such written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance;  
(b) declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the local investigation shall be paid.  
(2) The report of such person may be read as evidence in the case.  
(3) Where the Magistrate summons and examines an expert under section 139, the Magistrate may direct by 
whom the costs of such summoning and examinati on shall be paid.  
141. Procedure on order being made absolute and consequences of disobedience .—(1) When an order has 
been made absolute under section 136 or section 138,  the Magistrate shall give notice of the same to the person 
against whom the order wa s made, and shall further require him to perform the act directed by the order within a 
time to be fixed in the notice, and inform him that, in case of disobedience, he will be liable to the penalty provided 
by section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1 860).  
(2) If such act is not performed within the time fixed, the Magistrate may cause it to be performed, and may 
recover the costs of performing it, either by the sale of any building, goods or other property removed by his order, 
or by the  distress an d sale of any other movable property of such person within or without such Magistrate’s local 
jurisdiction, and if such other property is without such jurisdiction, the order shall authorise its attachment and sale 
when endorsed by the Magistrate within wh ose local jurisdiction the property to be attached is found.  
(3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith  under this section.  
142. Injunction pending inquiry .—(1) If a Magistrate making an order under section 133 considers that 83 
 immediate  measures should be taken to prevent imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public, he may 
issue such an injunction to the person against whom the order was made, as is required to obviate or prevent 
such danger or injury pending the determinat ion of the matter.  
(2)  In default of such person forthwith obeying such injunction, the Magistrate may himself use, or cause 
to be used, such means as he thinks fit to obviate such danger or to prevent such injury.  
(3)  No suit shall lie in respect of an ything done in good faith by a Magistrate under this section.  
143. Magistrate may prohibit repetition or continuance of public nuisance .—A District Magistrate or 
Sub-divisional Magistrate, or any other Executive Magistrate empowered by the State Government  or the 
District Magistrate in this behalf, may order any person not to repeat or continue a public nuisance, as defined 
in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or any special or local law.    
C.—Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger  
144. Power to i ssue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger .—(1) In cases where, in 
the opinion of a District Magistrate, a Sub -divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially 
empowered  by the State Government in this behalf, there is s ufficient ground for proceeding under this section 
and immediate prevention  or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by a written order stating the 
material facts of the case and served in the manner provided by section 134, direct any person t o abstain from a 
certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain property in his possession or under his management, 
if such Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to prevent, or tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance 
or injury t o any person lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety or a disturbance of the 
public tranquillity, or a riot, or an affray.  
(2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in cases where the circumstances do not 
admit of the serving in due time of a notice upon the person against whom the order is directed, be passed ex 
parte.  
(3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to persons residing in a 
particular place or area, or to the public g enerally when frequenting or visiting a particular place or area.  
(4) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two months from the making thereof:  
Provided that, if the State Government considers it necessary so to do for preventing  danger to human life, 
health or safety or for preventing a riot or any affray, it may, by notification, direct that an order made by a 
Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such further period not exceeding six months from the 
date on wh ich the order made by the Magistrate would have, but for such order, expired, as it may specify in 
the said notification.  
(5) Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind 
or alter any order made under this section, by himself or any Magistrate subordinate to him or by his 
predecessor -in-office.  
(6) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, 
rescind or alter any order made by it under the proviso to sub-section (4). 
(7) Where an application under sub -section (5) or sub -section (6) is received, the Magistrate, or the State 
Government, as the case may be, shall afford to the applicant an early opportunity of appearing before him or 
it, either in person or by pleader and showing cause against the order; and if the Magistrate or the State 
Government, as the case m ay be, rejects the application wholly or in part, he or it shall record in writing the 
reasons for so doing.  
D.—Disputes as to immovable property  
145. Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace .—
(1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from a report of a police officer or upon other 
information that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace ex ists concerning any land or water or 84 
 the boundaries thereof, within his local jurisdiction, he shall make an order in writing, stating the 
grounds of his being so satisfied, and requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his 
Court in person or by pleader, on a specified date and time, and to put in written statements of their 
respective claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression “land or water ” includes buil dings, markets, 
fisheries, crops or other produce of land, and the rents or profits of any such property.  
(3) A copy of the order shall be served in the manner provided by this Code for the service of a 
summons upon such person or persons as the Magistrate  may direct, and at least one copy shall be 
published by being affixed to some conspicuous place at or near the subject of dispute.  
(4) The Magistrate  shall  then, without reference to the merits or the claims of any of the parties 
to a right to possess t he subject of dispute, persue the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive 
all such evidence as may be produced by them, take such further evidence, if any, as he thinks  
necessary, and, if possible, decide whether any and which of the parties was, at the date of the order 
made by him under sub -section (1), in possession of the subject of dispute:  
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has been forcibly and wrongfully 
dispossessed within two months next before the date on which the report of a police officer or other 
information was received by the Magistrate, or after that date and before the date of his order under 
sub-section (1), he may treat the party so dispossessed as if that party had been in possession on the 
date of his  order under sub -section (1). 
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude any party so required to attend, or any other person 
interested, from showing that no such dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed; and in such case the 
Magistrate shall cancel his  said order, and all further proceedings thereon shall be stayed, but, subject 
to such cancellation, the order of the Magistrate under sub -section (1) shall be final.  
(6) (a) If the Magistrate decides that one of the parties was, or should under the provis o to sub -
section (4) be treated as being, in such possession of the said subject, he shall issue an order 
declaring such party  to be entitled to possession thereof until evicted therefrom in due course of law, 
and forbidding all disturbance of such possess ion until such eviction; and when he proceeds under 
the proviso to sub -section  (4), may restore to possession the party forcibly and wrongfully 
dispossessed.  
(b) The order made under this sub -section shall be served and published in the manner laid 
down in  sub-section  (3). 
(7) When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate may cause the legal 
representative of the deceased party to be made a party to the proceeding and shall thereupon 
continue the inquiry, and if any question arises as to who th e legal representative of a deceased party 
for the purposes of such proceeding is, all persons claiming to be representatives of the deceased 
party shall be made parties thereto.  
(8) If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce of the pro perty, the subject of 
dispute in a proceeding under this section pending before him, is subject to speedy and natural decay, 
he may make an order for the proper custody or sale of such property, and, upon the completion of 
the inquiry, shall make such orde r for the disposal of such property, or the sale -proceeds thereof, as 
he thinks fit.  
(9) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the proceedings under this section, on the 
application of either party, issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any 
document or thing.  
(10) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation of powers of the Magistrate to 
proceed under section 107.  
 85 
  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 145 of Act 2 of 1974 .-In sect ion 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as “the said 
Code”), - 
(a) in sub -section ( 1) for the words “Whenever an Executive Magistrate he words “Whenever in 
Greater Bombay, a Metropolitan Magistrate and elsewhere in the State, an Executive Magistrate” 
shall be substituted;  
(b) for sub -section ( 10), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: -  
“(10) In the case of an Executive Magistrate taking action unde r this section nothing in this 
section shall be deemed to be in derogation of his power to proceed under section 107. In the case 
of a Metropolitan Magistrate taking action under this section, if at any state of the proceeding , he 
is of the opinion that t he dispute calls for an action under section 107, he shall, after recording his 
reasons, forward the necessary information to the executive Magistrate having jurisdiction, to 
enable him to proceed under that section.”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 1 of 1978, s. 2] 
146. Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint receiver .—(1) If the Magistrate at any time 
after making the order under sub -section (1) of section 145 considers the case to be one of emergency, or 
if he decides that none of the parties was then in such possession as is referred to in section 145, or if he is 
unable to satisfy himself as to which of them was then in such possession of the subject of dispute, he 
may attach the subject of dispute until a competent Court has determined the rights of the parties thereto 
with regard to the person entitled to the possession thereof:  
Provided that such Magistrate may withdraw the attachment at any time if he is satisfied that there is 
no longer any likelihood of breach of the peace with regard to the subj ect of dispute.  
(2) When the Magistrate attaches the subject of dispute, he may, if no receiver in relation to such 
subject of dispute has been appointed by any Civil Court, make such arrangements as he considers proper 
for looking after the property or if  he thinks fit, appoint a receiver thereof, who shall have, subject to the 
control of the Magistrate, all the powers of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908):  
Provided that in the event of a receiver being subsequently ap pointed in relation to the subject of 
dispute by any Civil Court, the Magistrate — 
(a) shall order the receiver appointed by him to hand over the possession of the subject of dispute 
to the receiver appointed by the Civil Court and shall thereafter discharg e the receiver appointed by 
him; 
(b) may make such other incidental or consequential orders as may be just.  
147. Dispute concerning right of use of land or water .—(1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is 
satisfied from the report of a police officer or upon  other information, that a dispute likely to cause a 
breach of the peace exists regarding any alleged right of user of any land or water within his local 
jurisdiction, whether such right be claimed as an easement or otherwise, he shall  make  an  order in 
writing,  stating  the  grounds  of  his  being so satisfied and requiring the parties concerned in such 
dispute to attend his Court in person or by pleader on a specified date and time and to put in written 
statements of their respective claims.  86 
 Explanati on.—The expression “land or water ” has the meaning given to it in sub -section (2) of 
section 145.  
(2) The Magistrate shall then persue the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive all such 
evidence as may be produced by them respectively, consider t he effect of such evidence, take such further 
evidence, if any, as he thinks necessary and, if possible, decide whether such right exists; and the 
provisions of section 145 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of such inquiry.  
(3) If it appears to su ch Magistrate that such rights exist, he may make an order prohibiting any 
interference with the exercise of such right, including, in a proper case, an order for the removal of any 
obstruction in the exercise of any such right:  
Provided that no such order  shall be made where the right is exercisable at all times of the year, 
unless such right has been exercised within three months next before the receipt under sub -section (1) of 
the report of a police officer or other information leading to the institution  of the inquiry, or where the 
right is exercisable only at particular seasons or on particular occasions, unless the right has been 
exercised during the last of such seasons or on the last of such occasions before such receipt.  
(4) When in any proceedings commenced under sub -section  (1) of section 145 the Magistrate finds 
that the dispute is as regards an alleged right of user of land or water, he may, after recording his reasons, 
continue with the proceedings as if they had been commenced under sub -section  (1), 
and when in any proceedings commenced under sub -section (1) the magistrate finds that the dispute 
should be dealt with under section 145, he may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings 
as if they had been commenced under sub -section (1) of section 145.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 147 of Act 2 of 1974. —In section 147 of the said Code, in sub -section (1), for 
the words “Whenever an Executive Magistrate” the words “Whenever in Greater Bombay, a Metropolitan 
Magis trate and elsewhere in the State, an Executive Magistrate” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 1 of 1978, s. 3 ] 
148. Local inquiry .—(1) Whenever a local inquiry is necessary for the purposes of section 145, section 146 or 
section 147, a District Ma gistrate or Sub -divisional Magistrate may depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to 
make the inquiry, and may furnish him with such written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance, and 
may declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessar y expenses of the inquiry shall be paid.  
(2) The report of the person so deputed may be read as evidence in the case.  
(3) When any costs have been incurred by any party to a proceeding under section 145, section 146 or section 
147, the Magistrate passing a  decision may direct by whom such costs shall be paid, whether by such party or by any 
other party to the proceeding, and whether in whole or in part or proportion and such costs may include any 
expenses incurred in respect of witnesses and of pleaders ’ fees, which the Court may consider reasonable.  
CHAPTER XI  
PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE  
149. Police to prevent cognizable offences .—Every police officer may interpose for the purpose of preventing, 
and shall, to the best of his ability, prevent, the commis sion of any cognizable offence.  
150. Information of design to commit cognizable offences .—Every police officer receiving information of a 
design to commit any cognizable offence shall communicate such information to the police officer to whom he is 
subordi nate, and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or take cognizance of the commission of any such 
offence.  
151. Arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences .—(1) A police officer knowing of a design to 
commit any cognizable offence may  arrest, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant, the person so 87 
 designing, if it appears to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented.  
(2) No person arrested under sub -section (1) shall be detained in cust ody for a period exceeding twenty -four 
hours from the time of his arrest unless his further detention is required or authorised under any other provisions of 
this Code or of any other law for the time being in force.  
152. Prevention of injury to public pro perty .—A police officer may of his own authority interpose to prevent 
any injury attempted to be committed in his view to any public property, movable or immovable, or the removal or 
injury of any public landmark or buoy or other mark used for navigation.  
153. Inspection of weights and measures .—(1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, without a 
warrant, enter any place within the limits of such station for the purpose of inspecting or searching for any weights 
or measures or instruments for weigh ing, used or kept therein, whenever he has reason to believe that there are in 
such place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are false.  
(2) If he finds in such place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are false, he  may seize  
the same, and shall forthwith give information of such seizure to a Magistrate having jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER XII  
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE  
154. Information in cognizable cases .—(1) Every information relating to the  commission of a cognizable 
offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his 
direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to 
writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to 
be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this b ehalf:  
1[Provided that if the information is given  by the woman against whom an offence under section 326A,              
section 326B, section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C , section 354D, section 376, 2[section 376A, 
section 376 AB, section 376B, section 376C, section  376D , section 376DA, se ction  376DB], section 376E or section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted, then such information 
shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer:  
Provided further that — 
(a) in the event  that the person against whom an offence under section 354, section 354A, section 354B, 
section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 2[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C,          
section 376D , section 376DA, section 376 DB], section 376E o r section 509 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 
1860)  is alleged to have been committed or attempted, is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically 
disabled, then such information shall be recorded by a police officer, at the residenc e of the person s eeking to 
repor t such offence or a t a convenient place of such person’s choice, in the presence of an interpreter or a 
special educator, as the case may be;  
(b) the recording of such information shall be video  graphed;  
(c) the police officer shall get the statement of the person recorded by a Judicial Magistrate under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 5A) of section 164 as soon as possible.]  
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub -section (1) shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant.  
(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police station to record the 
information referred to in sub -section (1) may send the substance of such information, in writing and by post, to the 
Superintendent of Police concern ed who, if satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a cognizable 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 13 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 11, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018). 88 
 offence, shall either investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer 
subordinate to him, in the manner provided by this Code, and such officer shall have all the powers of an officer in 
charge of the police station in relation to that offence.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In first proviso to sub -section (1) of section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (here -in-after referred to a s 
the Code) for the words and figure “or section 509 ” the words, figures, letters and punctuations , “ section 509, 
section 509A or section 509B ” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 7]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 154 .—In the first proviso to sub -section (1) of section 154 of the principal 
Act, for the words, figures and letters “section 326A, section 326B, section 354, section 354A, section 
354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 3 76C, section 376D, 
section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code the words, figures and letters “section 326A, section 
326B section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D section 376, section 376A, 
section 376AA, section 376B, s ection 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376E or section 509 
of the Indian Penal Code” shall be substituted.  
In the sub -proviso (a) of the second proviso to sub -section (1) of section 154 of the principal Act, for 
the words, figures and letters “ section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, 
section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376E or section 509 of the 
Indian Penal Code” the words, figures and letters “section 354, section 354A, secti on 354B, section 354C, 
section 354D, section 376, section 376A, section 376AA, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, 
section 376DA, section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 13 ] 
155.  Information as to non -cognizable cases and investigation of such cases .—(1) When information is given to 
an officer in charge of a police station of the commission within the limits of such station of a non -cognizable offence, he 
shall enter or cau se to be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the 
State Government may prescribe in this behalf, and refer the informant to the Magistrate.  
(2) No police officer shall investigate a non -cognizable ca se without the order of a Magistrate having power to 
try such case or commit the case for trial.  
(3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers in respect of the investigation 
(except the power to arrest without warrant) as an off icer in charge of a police station may exercise in a cognizable 
case.  
(4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognizable, the case shall be deemed 
to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other offences are non -cognizable.  
156.  Police officer’s power to investigate cognizable case .—(1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, 
without the order of a Magistrate, investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area 
within the li mits of such station would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of Chapter XIII.  
(2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at any stage be called in question on the ground 
that the case was one which such officer was no t empowered under this section to investigate.  
(3) Any Magistrate empowered under section 190 may order such an investigation as above -mentioned.  
 89 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section  156. —In section 156 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 197 3, (2 of 1974) in its 
application to the State of Maharashtra (Hereinafter referred to as “the said Code ”), after sub -section (3), the 
following provisos shall be added, namely: — 
“Provided that, no Magistrate shall order an investigation under this section  against a person who is or was a public 
servant as defined under any other law for the time being in force, in respect of the act done by such public servant while 
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties, except with the previo us sanction under section 197 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or under any law for the time being in force:  
Provided further that, the sanctioning authority shall take a decision within a pe riod of ninety days from the 
date of the recei pt of the proposal for sanction and in case the sanctioning authority fails to take the decision within 
the said stipulated period of ninety days, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by the sanctioning 
authority. ”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 33 o f 2016, s. 2]  
157. Procedure for investigation .—(1) If, from information received or otherwise, an officer in charge of a 
police station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered under section 156 to 
investigate, he shall for thwith send a report of the same to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of such 
offence upon a police report and shall proceed in person, or shall depute one of his subordinate officers not being 
below such rank as the State Government may, by genera l or special order, prescribe in this behalf, to proceed, to 
the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case, and, if necessary, to take measures for the discovery 
and arrest of the offender:  
Provided that — 
(a) when information as to the c ommission of any such offence is given against any person by name and 
the case is not of a serious nature, the officer in charge of a police station need not proceed in person or depute a 
subordinate officer to make an investigation on the spot;  
 (b) if it appears to the officer in charge of a police station that there is no sufficient ground for entering on 
an investigation, he shall not investigate the case.  
1[Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement of the victi m shall be 
conducted at the residence of the victim or in the place of her choice and as far as practicable by a woman police 
officer in the presence of her parents or guardian or near relatives or social worker of the locality.]  
 (2) In each of the cases  mentioned in clauses  (a) and (b) of the proviso to sub -section (1), the officer in charge 
of the police station shall state in his report his reasons for not fully complying with the requirements of that sub -
section, and, in the case mentioned in clause (b) of the said proviso, the officer shall also forthwith notify to the 
informant, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, the fact that he will not investigate 
the case or cause it to be investigated.  
158. Report how submitted .—(1) Every report sent to a Magistrate under section 157 shall, if the State 
Government so directs, be submitted through such superior officer of police as the State Government, by general or 
special order, appoints in that behalf.  
(2) Such superior office r may give such instructions to the officer in charge of the police station as he thinks fit, 
and shall, after recording such instructions on such report, transmit the same without delay to the Magistrate.  
159. Power to hold investigation or preliminary in quiry .—Such Magistrate, on receiving such report, may direct 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.11 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  90 
 an investigation, or, if he thinks fit, at once proceed, or depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to proceed, to hold a 
preliminary inquiry into, or otherwise to dispose of, the case in the ma nner provided in this Code.  
160. Police officer’s power to require attendance of witnesses .—(1) Any police officer making an investigation 
under this Chapter may, by order in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the lim its 
of his own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be acquainted with the 
facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so required:  
Provided that no male person 1[under the age of fiftee n years or above the age of sixty -five years or a woman or 
a mentally or physically disabled person ] shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such 
male person or woman resides.  
(2) The State Government may, by rules made in th is behalf, provide for the payment by the police officer of the 
reasonable expenses of every person, attending under sub -section (1) at any place other than his residence.  
161. Examination of witnesses by police .—(1) Any police officer making an investigat ion under this Chapter, 
or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this 
behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with th e 
facts and circumstances of the case.  
(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by such officer, 
other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a  penalty 
or forfeiture.  
(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an examination under 
this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the statement of each such person whose 
statement he records.  
2[Provided that statement made under this sub -section may also be recorded by audio -video electronic means: ] 
3[Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 354, section 354A, 
section 354B, section 3 54C, section 354D, section 376, 4[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB ], section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  is 
alleged to have been committed or attempted shall b e recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer.]   
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
The second proviso to sub -section ( 3) of section 161  of the Code, shall be substituted with the following proviso, 
namely:  — 
Provided further that statement of the woman against whom an offence under  section 354 , section 
354A , section 354B , section 354C , section 354D , section 354E,  section 376 , section 376A , section 
376B , section 376C , section 376D , section 376E , section 509 , section 509A or section 509B of the In dian 
Penal Code, is alleged to have been committed  or attempted, shall be recorded, as far as possible, by 
woman police officer and shall also be recorded by audio -video means, as far as  possible, and it shall be 
the duty of such police officer to take all  such steps as are necessary to protect the identity of the woman.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 8 ] 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 14, for “under the age of fifteen years or woman” (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Ins. by  Act 5 of 2009, s. 12 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009). 
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 12, for “ section 376A section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 2 1-4-2018).  91 
 Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 161 .—In the second proviso to sub -section (3), of section 161 of the principal 
Act, for the words, figures and letters “section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 
354D, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376E or section 509 
of the Indian Penal Code “the words, figures and letters namely section 354, section 354A, section 354B, 
section 354C, section 354D, section 376, section 376A, section 376AA, section 376B, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh A ct 3 of 2019, s. 14]  
162. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence .—(1) No statement made by any 
person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed 
by the per son making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, 
or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial 
in respect of any offence und er investigation at the time when such statement was made:  
Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose statement has been 
reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be u sed by the accused, and with the 
permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof ma y also be 
used in the re -examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross -
examination.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of clause (1) of 
section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); or to affect the provisions of section 27 of that Act.  
Explanation .—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred to in sub -section  (1) may 
amount to contradiction if the s ame appears to be significant and otherwise relevant having regard to the context in 
which such omission occurs and whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a 
question of fact.   
163. No inducement to be offered .—(1) No police officer or other person in authority shall offer or make, or 
cause to be offered or made, any such inducement, threat or promise as is mentioned in section 24 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
(2) But no police officer or other pers on shall prevent, by any caution or otherwise, any person from making in 
the course of any investigation under this Chapter any statement which he may be disposed to make of his own free 
will: 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall affect the prov isions of sub -section (4) of section 164.  
164. Recording of confessions and statements .—(1) Any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate may, 
whether or not he has jurisdiction in the case, record any confession or statement made to him in the course  of an 
investigation under this Chapter or under any other law for the time being in force, or at any time afterwards before 
the commencement of the inquiry or trial:  
1[Provided that any confession or statement made under this sub -section may also be recor ded by audio -video 
electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of an offence:  
Provided  further that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on whom any power  of a Magistrate 
has been conferred under any law for the time being in force.]  
 (2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person making it that he is not 
bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall 
not r ecord any such confession unless, upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is 
being made voluntarily.  
(3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the Magistrate states that he is not 
willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not authorise the detention of such person in police custody.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009 , s.13 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   92 
 (4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided in section 281 for recording the examination 
of an accused person and shall be s igned by the person making the confession; and the Magistrate shall make a 
memorandum at the foot of such record to the following effect: — 
“I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, any confession 
he may make may be used as evidence against him and I believe that this confession was voluntarily made. It 
was taken in my presence and hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him to be 
correct, and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him.  
(Signed ) A. B.  
Magistrate. ” 
(5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under sub -section  (1) shall be recorded in such manner 
hereinafter provided for the recording of evidence as is, in the opinion of the Magistrate, be st fitted to the 
circumstances of the case; and the Magistrate shall have power to administer oath to the person whose statement is 
so recorded.  
1[(5A) (a) In cases punishable under section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D,                
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 376, 2[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C,          
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB,] section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
the Judicial Ma gistrate shall record the statement of the person against whom such offence has been committed in 
the manner prescribed in sub -section ( 5), as soon as the commission of the offence is brought to the notice of the 
police:  
Provided that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically disabled, 
the Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement:  
Provided further that if the person making the statement is temporaril y or permanently mentally or physically 
disabled, the statement made by the person, with the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator, shall be video 
graphed . 
(b) A statement recorded under clause ( a) of a person, who is temporarily or permanentl y mentally or physically 
disabled, shall be considered a statement in lieu of examination -in-chief, as specified in section 137 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) such that the maker of the statement can be cross -examined on such statement, 
witho ut the need for recording the same at the time of trial.]  
(6) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this section shall forward it to the Magistrate by 
whom the case is to be inquired into or tried.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In clause (a) of sub -section (5A) of Section 164 of the Code, for the words and figures “or section 
509” the punctuation, words and figures , “section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B ” shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 9]  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
After sub -section ( 1) of section 164, the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: —“(1A) 
Where; in any island, there is no Judicial Magistrate for the time being , and the State Government is of 
opinion that it is necessary and expedient so to do , that Government may, after consulting the High Court, 
specially empower any Executive Magistrate (not being a police officer), to exercise the powers conferred 
by sub -section ( 1) on a Judicial Magistrate, and thereupon references in section 164 to a Judicial 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 16 (w.e.f. 13 -3-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 13, for “ section 376A , section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 2 1-4-2018).  93 
 Magistrate shall be construed as references to the Executive Magistrate so empowered. ”; 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 197 4), s. 5.] 
1[164A. Medical examination of the victim of rape .—(1) Where, during the stage when an offence of 
committing rape or attempt to commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman with 
whom rape is alleged or attemp ted to have been committed or attempted, examined by a medical expert, such 
examination shall be conducted by a registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government 
or a local authority and in the absence of such a practitioner, by any other registered medical practitioner, with the 
consent of such woman or of a person competent to give such consent on her behalf and such woman shall be sent to 
such registered medical practitioner within twenty -four hours from the time of receiving t he information relating to 
the commission of such offence.  
 (2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom such woman is sent, shall, without delay, examine her person 
and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely: — 
(i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom she was brought;  
(ii) the age of the woman;  
(iii) the description of material taken from the person of the woman for DNA profiling;  
(iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman;  
(v) general mental condition of the woman; and  
(vi) other material particulars in reasonable detail.  
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.  
(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of th e person competent to give such 
consent on her behalf to such examination had been obtained.  
(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report.  
(6) The registered medical practitioner shall, without dela y forward the report to the investigating officer who 
shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 173 as part of the documents referred to in clause ( a) of            
sub-section ( 5) of that section.  
(7) Nothing in this section shall be const rued as rendering lawful any examination without the consent of the 
woman or of any person competent to give such consent on her behalf.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “examination ” and “registered medical practitioner ” shall have 
the same meanings as in section 53.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In Section 164A, except explanation clause, of the Code, for the words “registered medical practitioner ”, where 
it occurs for the first time, the words “female registered medical practitioner ” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015 s. 10.] 
165. Search by police officer .—(1) Whenever an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer making 
an investigation has reasonable grounds for believing that anything necessary for the purposes of an investigation 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 17 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  94 
 into any offence which he is authorised to investigate may be found in any place within the limits of the police 
station of which he is in charge, or to which he is attached, and that such thing cannot in his opinion be otherwi se 
obtained without undue delay, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds of his belief and specifying in 
such writing, so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made, search, or cause search to be made, for 
such thing in any place within the limits of such station.  
(2) A police officer proceeding under sub -section (1), shall, if practicable, conduct the search in person.  
(3) If he is unable to conduct the search in person, and there is no other person competent to make the sea rch 
present at the time, he may, after recording in writing his reasons for so doing, require any officer subordinate to him 
to make the search, and he shall deliver to such subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the place to be 
searched, and so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made; and such subordinate officer may 
thereupon search for such thing in such place.  
(4) The provisions of this Code as to search -warrants and the general provisions as to searches contained in 
section 100 shall, so far as may be, apply to a search made under this section.  
(5) Copies of any record made under sub -section (1) or sub -section (3) shall forthwith be sent to the nearest 
Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence, and the owner o r occupier of the place searched shall, on 
application, be furnished, free of cost, with a copy of the same by the Magistrate.  
166. When officer in charge of police station may require another to issue search -warrant .—(1) An officer 
in charge of a police s tation or a police officer not being below the rank of sub -inspector making an investigation 
may require an officer in charge of another police station, whether in the same or a different district, to cause a 
search to be made in any place, in any case in which the former officer might cause such search to be made, within 
the limits of his own station.  
(2) Such officer, on being so required, shall proceed according to the provisions of section 165, and shall 
forward the thing found, if any, to the officer a t whose request the search was made.  
 (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay  occasioned by requiring  an officer in charge of another 
police station to cause a search to be made under sub -section (1) might result in evidence of the commiss ion of an 
offence being concealed or destroyed, it shall be lawful for an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer 
making any  investigation under this  Chapter to search, or cause to be searched, any  place in the limits of another 
police  station in accordance with the provisions of section 165, as if such place were within the limits of his own 
police station.  
(4) Any officer conducting a search under sub -section  (3) shall forthwith send notice of the search to the officer 
in charge of th e police station within the limits of which such place is situate, and shall also send with such notice a 
copy of the list (if any) prepared under section 100, and shall also send to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take 
cognizance of the offence, copie s of the records referred to in sub -sections (1) and (3) of section 165.  
(5) The owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished free of cost with a copy of 
any record sent to the Magistrate under sub -section (4). 
1[166A. Letter  of request to competent authority for investigation in a country or place outside India .—
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, if, in the course of an investigation into an offence, an 
application is made by the investigating officer or any  officer superior in rank to the investigating officer that 
evidence may be available in a country or place outside India, any Criminal Court may issue a letter of request to a 
Court or an authority in that country or place competent to deal with such requ est to examine orally any person 
supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case and to record his statement made in the 
course of such examination and also to require such person or any other person to produce any document or thing 
which may be in his possession pertaining to the case and to forward all the evidence so taken or collected or the 
authenticated copies thereof or the thing so collected to the Court issuing such letter.  
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in su ch manner as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf.  
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub -section (1) shall be deemed to be the 
evidence collected during the course of investigation under this Chapter.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1990).  95 
 166B. Lette r of request from a country or place outside India to a Court or an authority for investigation 
in India .—(1) Upon receipt of a letter of request from a Court or an authority in a country or place outside India 
competent to issue such letter in that countr y or place for the examination of any person or production of any 
document or thing in relation to an offence under investigation in that country or place, the Central Government 
may, if it thinks fit — 
 (i) forward the same to the Chief Metropolitan Magist rate or Chief Judicial Magistrate or such 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, who shall thereupon summon 
the person before him and record his statement or cause the do cument or thing to be produced ; or 
(ii) send the letter to any police officer for investigation, who shall thereupon investigate into the offence in 
the same manner,  
as if the offence had been committed within India.  
(2) All the evidence taken or collected under sub -section (1), or authenticated cop ies thereof or the thing so 
collected, shall be forwarded by the Magistrate or police officer, as the case may be, to the Central Government for 
transmission to the Court or the authority issuing the letter of request, in such manner as the Central Governm ent 
may deem fit.]  
167. Procedure when  investigation cannot be completed in twenty -four hours .—(1) Whenever any person 
is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears that the  investigation cannot be   completed within the  period of 
twenty -four hour s fixed by section 57, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well -
founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the  police officer making the  investigation, if he is not below 
the rank of sub -inspector, shall  forthwith transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary 
hereinafter  prescribed  relating to the case, and  shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.  
 (2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is fo rwarded under this section may, whether he has or has not 
jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time, authorise the detention of the accused in such custody as such 
Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole; and if he h as no jurisdiction to try the case 
or commit it for trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a 
Magistrate having such jurisdiction:  
Provided that —  
1[(a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused person, otherwise than in custody of the 
police, beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no 
Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody under this paragra ph for a total period 
exceeding —  
(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;  
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any oth er offence,  
and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the case may be, the accused person shall be 
released on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every person released on bail under this sub -section 
shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter;]  
2[(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused in custody of the police under this section 
unless the accused is produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till the 
accused remains in the custody of the police, but the Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody 
on production of the accused either in person or through the medium of electronic vide o linkage;]  
 (c) no Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in this behalf by the High Court, shall 
authorise detention in the custody of the police.  
3[Explanation I.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the 
period specified in paragraph (a), the accused shall be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.]  
4[Explanation II.—If any question arises whether an accused person was produced before the Magistrate as 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 13, for paragraph  (a)  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 14 ,  for cl. ( b) (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 13  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
4. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s.14 , for Explanation  II (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  96 
 required under clau se (b), the production of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order 
authorising detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to production of the accused person through the 
medium of electronic video linkage, as the case ma y be.]  
1[Provided further that in case of a woman under eighteen years of age, the detention shall be authorised to be in 
the custody of a remand home or recognised social institution.]  
 2[(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), the officer in charge of the 
police station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank of a sub -inspector, may, 
where a Judicial Magistrate is not available, transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on who m the powers of a 
Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate have been conferred, a copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter 
prescribed relating to the case, and shall, at the same time, forward the accused to such Executive Magistrate, and 
thereupon  such Executive Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, authorise the detention of the 
accused person in such custody as he may think fit for a term not exceeding seven days in the aggregate; and, on the 
expiry of the period of detention so  authorised, the accused person shall be released on bail except where an order 
for further detention of the accused person has been made by a Magistrate competent to make such order; and, 
where  an order for such further detention is made, the period durin g which the accused person was detained in 
custody under the orders made by an Executive Magistrate under this sub -section, shall be taken into account in 
computing the period specified in paragraph (a) of the proviso to sub -section (2): 
Provided that befo re the expiry of the period aforesaid, the Executive Magistrate shall transmit to the nearest 
Judicial Magistrate the records of the case together with a copy of the entries in the diary relating to the case which 
was transmitted to him by the officer in c harge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, as 
the case may be.]  
(3) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention in the custody of the police shall record his reasons for 
so doing.  
 (4) Any Magistrate other than th e Chief Judicial Magistrate making such order shall forward a copy of his 
order, with his reasons for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(5) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons -case, the investigation is not concluded within a per iod 
of six months from the date on which the accused was arrested, the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further 
investigation into the offence unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate that for special 
reasons and in the i nterests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond the period of six months is 
necessary.  
(6) Where any order stopping further investigation into an offence has been made under sub -section (5), the 
Sessions Judge may, if he is satisfied, on a n application made to him or otherwise, that further investigation into the 
offence ought to be made, vacate the order made under sub -section (5) and direct further investigation to be made 
into the offence subject to such directions with regard to bail an d other matters as he may specify.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Gujarat  
In the proviso to  sub-Section (2) of section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to the 
State of Gujarat, — 
(i) for paragraph  (a), the following paragraph shall be sub stituted, namely:  — 
(a) the Magistrate may authorise detention of the accused person , otherwise than in the custody of the police, 
beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate  grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate 
shall autho rise the detention of the accused person in custody  under this section for  a total period exceeding — 
(i) one hundred and twenty days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of n ot less  than ten years,  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 14 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s.  13 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  97 
 (ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any offence;  
and, on the expiry of the said period of one hundred and twenty days, or sixty days, as the ease may be, the accused 
person  shall b e released on bail if he is pr epared  to and does furnish bail;  and every person released on bail under this 
section shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter;  
(ii) in paragraph ( b), for the words “no Magistrate shall ” the words “no Magistrate shall, except for reason to 
be recorded in writing ” shall be substituted;  
(iii) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation II, and before Explanation II as so  numbered, the 
following  Explanation shall be inserted, namely:  — 
Explanation  I. —For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the period 
specified in paragraph ( a), the accused person shall be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.  
Amendment to apply to pending investigat ion.—The provisions of  section 167  of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, as amended by this Act, shall apply to every in vestigation pending immediately  before the 
commencement of this Act, if the period of detention of the accused person, otherwise than  in the custody of the 
police , authorised under that section, had not, at such commencement, exceeded sixty days.]  
[Vide Gujarat Act 21 of 1976, s. 2 & 3 ] 
Gujarat  
In Section 167, in sub -section  (2) : — 
(1) in the proviso, for paragraph ( b), the following p aragraph shall be substituted,  namely:  — 
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorise further detention in any  custody under this section unless — 
(i) where the accused is in the custody of police, he is produced in person before the Magistrate, and  
(ii) where the ac cused is otherwise than in the custody of the police, he is produced before the Magistrate 
either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage, in accordance with the direction of the 
Magistrate. ”; 
(2) in Explanation II , after the words “ whether an accused person was  produced before the Magistrate ”, the 
words “in person or, as the case may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage ” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Gujarat  Act 31 of 2003, s. 2.]  
Chhattisgarh  
(1) In clause ( b) of Sub -Section  (2) of Section 167  of the principal Act, for the word “any” the word “police ” 
shall be substituted.  
(2) After clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of Section 167  of the Principal Act, the following new sub -clause  (bb) 
shall be added, namely: — 
“(bb) No m agistrate shall authorise detention of the accused person other than in the custody of the police under 
this section unless the accused is produced before him either in person of through the medium of electronic video 
linkage and represented by his pleader in the Co urt.” 
(3) In explanation II, after words “was produced ” the word “from police custody ” shall be added.  
(4) After explanation II, the following new explanation shall be added: - 
“III. If any question arises whether an accused person was produced from otherwi se than in the custody of the 
police in person or (as the case may be) through medium of electronic video linkage before the Magistrate as 
required under paragraph ( bb), the production of the accused person may be proved by his or his pleader ’s signature 
on the order authorising detention. ” 
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 13 of 2006, sec. 3]  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
In section 167 ,— 
(i) in sub -section ( 1) after the words “nearest Judicial Magistrate ” the words “or, if there  is no 
Judicial Magistrate in an island, to an Executive Magistrate functioning in that  island ” shall be inserted ;   
(ii) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(1A) Where a copy of the entries in  diary is transmitted to an Executive Magistrate, reference in section 167 
to a Magistrate shall be construed as references to such Executive Magistrate; ” 98 
 (iii) to sub -section ( 3), the following proviso shall be added, namely: — 
“Provided  that no Executive Magistrate other than the District Magistrate or Sub -divisional  Magistrate, shall 
unless  he is  specially empowered in this behalf  by the State  Government , authorise d etention in the custody 
of the police. ” 
(iv) to sub -section ( 4), the following proviso sha ll be added, namely: — 
“Provided  that, where such order is made by an Executive Magistrate, the Magistrate  making  the order 
shall  forward  a copy of the order,  with his reasons for making it, to the Executive Magistrate to whom he is 
immediately subordinate. ” 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974),  s. 5.] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 167.  — In Section 167 of the Code of Criminal P rocedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) in 
its application to the State of Maharashtra ,— 
(a) in sub-section ( 2) in the proviso, for paragraph ( b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody, of the accused person under this section 
unless, the accused person is produced before him  in person, and for any extension of custody 
otherwise than the extension in the police custody, the accused person may be produced either in 
person or through the medium of electronic video linkage .” ; 
(b) in Explanation  II, for the words “an accused pers on was produced ”, the words “an accused person 
was produced in person or as the case may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage ” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 8 of 2005, s. 2]  
Madhya Pradesh  
 Amendment of Section 167 .—In sub -section ( 2) of section 167 of the principal Act, — (i) in the 
proviso, for paragraph ( b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely: — 
 “(b) no magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this section unless the accused is 
produced befo re him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till such time the accused 
remains in the custody of police, but the Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody on 
production of accused either in person or through the medium  of electronic video linkage; ”; 
 (ii) for Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Explanation II.—If any question arise whether an accused person was produced before the 
Magistrate as required under paragraph ( b), the prod uction of the accused person may be proved by his 
signature on the order authorising detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to production 
of the accused person through the medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may be. ”. 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 2008, s. 3. ] 
West Bengal  
In section 167 of the principal Act, — 
(a) In Section 167 of sub-section ( 5), the following sub -section shall be substituted :— 
“(5) If, in respect of — 
(i) any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons case, th e investigation is not concluded within 
a period of six months, or  
(ii) any case exclusively triable by a Court of Session or a case under Chapter XVIII of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the investigation is not concluded within a period of three year s, or
  (iii) any case other than those mentioned in clauses ( i) and ( ii), the investigation is not 
concluded within a period of two years, from the date on which the accused was arrested or made 
his appearance, the Magistrate shall make an order stopping f urther investigation into the offence 
and shall discharge the accused unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate 99 
 that for special reasons and in the interests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond 
the periods men tioned in this sub -section is necessary. ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 6), after the “words any order stopping further investigation into an offence has 
been made ” the words “and the accused has been discharged ” shall be inserted.  
 [Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 1988 , s. 4.]  
West Bengal  
Amendment of section 167. - In the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 167 of the principal Act, for 
clause ( b), the following clause shall be substituted: — 
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorize detention under this section — 
(i) in the p olice custody, unless the accused is produced before him in person every  time till the 
accused is in police custody;  
(ii) in the judicial custody, unless the accused is produced before him either in person or through 
the medium of electronic video linkage; ”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 20 of 2004, s. 3.]  
Assam  
In Section 167 of the Code: — 
(a) in sub -section ( i) the reference to “Judicial Magistrate” shall be construed as reference also to 
executive Magistrate;  
(b) in sub -section ( 2):— 
(i) for the word “Magistrate ” at the first two places where that word is preceded by the definite 
article, the words “Judicial Magistrate or the Executive Magistrate, as the case may be,” shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) for the word “Magistrate”, at the place where that word is preceded b y the indefinite article 
“a”, the words and brackets “Magistrate (whether Judicial or Executive)” shall be substituted;  
(iii) paragraph (c) of the proviso shall be omitted;  
(c) Sub-section (2A) shall be omitted: — 
(d) in sub -section ( 4), for the words “to t he Chief Judicial Magistrate,” the words “where such 
Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate, to the  Chief Judicial Magistrate and where such Magistrate is an  
Executive Magistrate to the Session Judge” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3( 3) and the Schedule. ]  
Delhi  
In its application to the State of Delhi, in section 167, in sub -section ( 2):— 
(i) for clause ( b), substitute the following clause, namely: — 
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this section unless the  accused is produced 
before him either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage:  
Provided that if the accused is in police custody, no Magistrate shall authorise his detention in any custody 
unless the accused is produced before him in p erson;”  
(ii) for the Explanation II  thereunder, substitute the following Explanation , namely :— 
“Explanation II .- If any question arises whether an accused person was produced in person or, as the case 
may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage before the magistrate as required under paragraph ( b), 
the production of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order authorising his detention or by 
video recording of the proceedings, as the case may be.” . 
[Vide Delhi Act 4 of 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f.  16-8-2004).]  
Orissa  
Amendment  of section 167 .—In the proviso to sub -section (2) of section 167 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ,- 
(i) for paragraph (b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorize detention of the accused in custody of the police under this section unless 
the accused in produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till the accused 100 
 remains in the custody of the police, but the Magistrat e may extend further detention in Judicial custody on 
production of the accused either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage;”, and  
 (ii) for Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Explanation II — If any question arises whether an accused person was produced before the Magistrate as 
required under paragraph (b), the production of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order 
authorizing detention or by the order certified by the Magis trate as to production of the accused person through 
the medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may be.”.  
[Vide Orissa Act 16 of 2009, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 167 .— In section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in paragraph (a) of the  
proviso to sub -section (2), — 
(i) For the words “under this paragraph” the words “under this section” shall be substituted; and  
(ii) For the words “ninety days” wherever they occur, the words “ one hundred and twenty days” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Oriss a Act 11 of 1997, s. 2]  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 167, Central Act (2 of 1974) .-In the Code of Criminal Pro cedure, 1973, in section 167 in 
its application to the State of Andhra Pradesh, in sub -section (2), - 
(i) to clause (b), the f ollowing shall be added at the end, namely: - 
“either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage:”;  
(ii) in the Explanation II thereunder, for the words “an accused person was produced”, the words “an accused 
person was produced in person o r as the case may be through the medium of electronic video linkage” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 31 of 2001, s. 2]  
Manipur  
In section 167 of the Code, after sub -section (6), the following sub -section shall be added, namely: -- 
“(7) A spec ified Executive Magistrate shall, to the exclusion of any other Magistrate, have power 
to authorise detention under this section of any person accused of any offences specified in clause (a) 
of subsection (1) of section 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Manipur Second Amendment) Act, 
1984 and as respects those offences, -- 
(i) the reference in the foregoing sub -sections to a Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate shall b 
construed as reference to a Specified Executive Magistrate;  
(ii) paragraph (c) of the prov iso to sub -section (2) shall be deemed to have been omitted;  
(iii) sub -section (2A) shall be deemed to have been omitted;  
(iv) the words “other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate” in sub -section 4, shall be deemed to have 
been omitted and for the words “to  the Chief Judicial Magistrate” in that sub -section, the words “to 
the Sessions Judge” shall be deemed to have been substituted.”.  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule ] 
Meghalaya  
Amendment of Section 167 of the Code. —In section 167 of the Code — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1) 
(i) for the words “nearest Judicial Magistrate” the words “Deputy Commissioner or Assistant to 
the Deputy Commissioner” shall be substituted.  
(ii) for the words “such Magistrate” occurring at the end, the word “him” shall be su bstituted.  
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for the word “Magistrate” occurring at the beginning, the words 
“Deputy Commissioner” and for the words “such Magistrate occurring between the words “as” 
and ‘thinks’ the word “he” shall substituted.  
(c) in the provisos ( a), (b) and the explanation below proviso ( c), to sub -section ( 2) for the 
word “Magistrate” wherever it occurs the words “Deputy Commissioner or Assistant to the 
Deputy Commissioner shall substituted.  101 
 (d) in the proviso (c) to sub -section (2), for the wor d “Magistrate” the words “Assistant to the 
Deputy Commissioner” shall be substituted.  
(e) In sub -section (3), for the words “A Magistrate” the words “Deputy Commissioner or 
Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner” shall be substituted.  
(f) that for sub -sectio n (4), the following shall be substituted, namely — 
“(4) Any Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner making such order shall forward a copy of his 
order, with his reasons for making it, to the Deputy Commissioner.”  
(g) in sub -section (5), for the words “a Magi strate” occurring at the beginning and 
“Magistrate” occurring elsewhere, the words “an Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner” and 
“Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner” respectively shall be substituted.  
(h) in sub -section (6) for the words “Sessions Judge”  the words “Deputy Commissioner” shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Meghalaya Act 4 of 1988, s. 4]  
Uttar Pradesh  
After section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as amended in its application to Uttar 
Pradesh, the following section shall be inserted,  namely: — 
“167-A. For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of section 167 shall, so far 
as may be apply also in relation to any person arrested by, or under any order or direction of, a magistrate, 
whether executive or judicial.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 8 of 197 7, s. 2]  
168. Report of investigation by subordinate police officer .—When any subordinate police officer has made 
any investigation under this Chapter, he shall report the result of such investigation to the officer in cha rge of the 
police station.  
169. Release of accused when evidence deficient .—If, upon an  investigation under this Chapter, it  appears to 
the officer in charge of the police station that there is  not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion t o 
justify the forwarding of the accused to a Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in custody, release him on 
his executing a bond, with or without sureties, as such officer may direct, to appear, if and when so required, before 
a Magistrate em powered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, and to try the accused or commit him 
for trial.  
170. Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient .—(1) If, upon an investigation under this 
Chapter, it appears to the officer in c harge of the police station that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground  
as  aforesaid, such  officer  shall  forward   the accused under custody to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance 
of the offence upon a police report and to try the accu sed or commit him for trial, or, if the offence is bailable and 
the accused is able to give security, shall take security from him for his appearance before such Magistrate on a day 
fixed and for his attendance from day to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed.  
(2) When the officer in charge of a police station forwards an accused person to a Magistrate or takes security 
for his appearance before such Magistrate under this section, he shall send to such Magistrate any weapon or other 
article w hich it may be necessary to produce before him, and shall require the complainant (if any) and so many of 
the persons who appear to such officer to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case as he may think 
necessary, to execute a bond to a ppear before the Magistrate as thereby directed and prosecute or give evidence (as 
the case may be) in the matter of the charge against the accused.  
(3) If the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is mentioned in the bond, such Court shall be held to inc lude 
any Court to which such Magistrate may refer the case for inquiry or trial, provided reasonable notice of such 
reference is given to such complainant or persons.  
(4) The officer in whose presence the bond is executed shall deliver a copy thereof to on e of the persons who 
executed it, and shall then send to the Magistrate the original with his report.  102 
 171. Complainant and witnesses not to be required to accompany police officer and not to be subjected to 
restraint .—No complainant or witness on his way t o any Court shall be required to accompany a police officer, or 
shall be subjected to unnecessary restraint or inconvenience, or required to give any security for his appearance 
other than his own bond:  
Provided that, if any complainant or witness refuses to attend or to execute a bond as directed in section 170, the 
officer in charge of the police station may forward him in custody to the Magistrate, who may detain him in custody 
until he executes such bond, or until the hearing of the case is completed.  
172. Diary of proceedings in investigation .—(1) Every police officer making an investigation under this 
Chapter shall day by day enter his proceedings in the investigation in a diary, setting forth the time at which the 
information reached him, the time at which he began and closed his investigation, the place or places visited by him, 
and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his investigation.  
1[(1A) The statements of witnesses recorded during the course of investigation under section 161 sh all be 
inserted in the case diary.  
(1B) The diary referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be a volume and duly paginated. ] 
(2) Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case under inquiry or trial in such Court, and may use such 
diaries, not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such inquiry or trial.  
(3) Neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for such diaries, nor shall he or they be entitled to see them 
merely because they are referred to by the Court; but, if they are  used by the police officer who made them to refresh his 
memory, or if the Court uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer, the provisions of section 161 or sect ion 
145, as the case may be, of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872),  shall apply.  
173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation .—(1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be 
completed without unnecessary delay.  
2[(1A) The investigation in relation to 3[an offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B,  376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or 
376E  of the Indian Penal Code shall be completed within two months ] from the date on which the information was recorded by 
the officer in charge of the police station.]  
(2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take 
cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form prescribed b y the State Government, stating — 
 (a) the names of the parties;  
(b) the nature of the information;  
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case;  
(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom;  
(e) whether the accused has been arrested;  
(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if  so, whether with or without sureties;  
(g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 170.  
4[(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached where investigation relates 
to an offence under  5[sections 376, 376A, 376A B, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB ] or section 376E of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) ].] 
(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, the 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  15 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by   s. 16 , ibid., (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of   2018, s. 14, fo r “rape of a child may be completed within three months” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).  
4. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 16 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 2 of 2018, s. 1 4, for “section 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 387D” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  103 
 action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the in formation relating to the commission of the offence was 
first given.  
(3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 158, the report shall, in any case in 
which the State Government by general or special order so directs, be submitt ed through that officer, and he may, 
pending the orders of the Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further investigation.  
(4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that the accused has been releas ed on his 
bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge of such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit.  
(5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 170 applies, the police officer shall forward to the 
Magistrate along with the report — 
(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution proposes to rely other than those 
already sent to the Magistrate during investigation;  
(b) the statements recorded under section 161 of all the persons whom the prosecution pro poses to examine 
as its witnesses.  
(6) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such statement is not relevant to the subject -matter of 
the proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential in the interest s of justice and i s inexpedient in the 
public interest, he shall indicate that part of the statement and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude 
that part from the copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making such request.  
(7) Where the police officer investigating the case finds it convenient so to do, he may furnish to the accused 
copies of all or any of the documents referred to in sub -section (5). 
 (8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respec t of an offence after a 
report under sub -section  (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer in 
charge of the police station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a 
further report or reports regarding such evidence in the form prescribed; and the provisions of sub -sections  (2) to (6) 
shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded 
under sub -section (2). 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 173. —In section 173 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), in sub -clause 
(h) of clause (i), for the words, figures and letters “or section 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D or 376E of 
the Indian Penal Code” the words figures and letters “section 376, 376A, 376AA, 376B, 376C, 376D, 
376DA or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code” Shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 16 ] 
174. Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc. —(1) When  the officer in charge of a police station or some 
other police officer specially  empowered by the State Government in that behalf receives information that a person 
has committed suicide, or has been killed by another or by an animal or by machinery or b y an accident, or has died 
under circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person has committed an offence, he shall 
immediately give intimation thereof to the nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless 
otherwis e directed by any rule prescribed by the State Government, or by any general or special order of the District 
or Sub -divisional Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where the body of such deceased person is, and there, in the 
presence of two or more resp ectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a 
report of the apparent cause of death, describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may 
be found on the body, and stating in what manner, or by  what weapon or instrument (if any); such marks appear to 
have been inflicted.  104 
 (2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other persons, or by so many of them as 
concur therein, and shall be forthwith forwarded to the District Magistrate or the Sub -divisional 
Magistrate.  
(3) 1[When — 
(i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven years of her marriage; or  
(ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage in any 
circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person committed an offence in relation 
to such woman; or  
(iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage and any relative of 
the woman has made a request in this behalf; or  
(iv) there is any doubt regardin g the cause of death; or  
(v) the police officer for any other reason considers it expedient so to do,  
he shall], subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, forward the body, 
with a view to its being examined, to the neares t Civil Surgeon, or other qualified medical man appointed 
in this behalf by the State Government, if the state of the weather and the distance admit of its being so 
forwarded without risk of such putrefaction on the road as would render such examination us eless.  
(4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold inquests, namely, any District Magistrate or 
Sub-divisional Magistrate and any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the 
State Government or the District Magistrate.  
175. Power to summon persons .—(1) A police officer proceeding under section 174 may, by order 
in writing, summon two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose of the said investigation, and any 
other person who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the  case and every person so summoned shall 
be bound to attend and to answer truly all questions other than questions the answers to which would have 
a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.  
(2) If the facts do not disclose  a cognizable offence to which section 170 applies, such persons shall 
not be required by the police officer to attend a Magistrate ’s Court.  
176. Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death .—(1) 2[ 3*** when the case is of the nature referred 
to in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 3) of section 174 ], the nearest Magistrate empowered to hold 
inquests shall, and in any other case mentioned in sub -section (1) of section 174, any Magistrate so 
empowered may hold an inquiry into the cause of death either instead of, or in addition to, the 
investigation held by the police officer; and if he does so, he shall have all the powers in conducting it 
which he would have in holding an inquiry into an offence.  
4[(1A) Where, — 
  (a) any person dies or disappears, or  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1983, s . 3, for certain words  (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
2. Subs. by,   s. 4, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
3. Certain words omitted by Act 25 of 2005, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  105 
 (b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman,  
while such person or woman is in the custody of the police or in any other custody authoris ed by the 
Magistrat e or the Court, under this Code  in addition to the inquiry or investigation held by the p olice, an 
inquiry shall be held by the Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, within 
whose local jurisdiction the offence has been committed.]  
(2) The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall record the evidence taken by hi m in connection 
therewith in any manner hereinafter prescribed according to the circumstances of the case.  
 (3) Whenever such Magistrate considers it expedient to make an examination of the dead body of any 
person who has been already interred, in order to  discover the cause of his death, the Magistrate may 
cause the body to be disinterred and examined.  
(4) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the Magistrate shall, wherever practicable, 
inform the relatives of the deceased whose names and addr esses are known, and shall allow them to 
remain present at the inquiry.  
1[(5) The Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate or Executive Magistrate or police officer 
holding an inquiry or investigation, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 1A) shall, within twenty -four 
hours of the death of a person, forward the body with a view to its being examined to the nearest Civil 
Surgeon or other qualified medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government, unless it is 
not possible to do so for reasons to be recorded in writing.]  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “relative ” means parents, children, brothers, sisters and 
spouse.  
CHAPTER XIII  
JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL  COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
177. Ordinary place of inquiry a nd trial .—Every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried 
by a Court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed.  
178. Place of inquiry or trial .—(a) When it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence 
was committed, or  
(b) where  an offence is committed partly in one local area and partly in another, or  
(c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be committed in more local areas than 
one, or  
(d) where it consists of several acts done in different local areas,  
it may  be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.  
179. Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues .—When an act is an offence by 
reason of anything which has been done and of a consequence which has ensued,  the offence may be inquired into 
or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has ensued.  
180. Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation to other offence .—When an act is an offence 
by reason of its relation to any other act which is also an offence or which would be an offence if the doer were 
capable of committing an offence, the first -mentioned offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose 
local jurisdiction either act  was done.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2 005, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  106 
 181. Place of trial in case of certain offences .—(1) Any offence of being a thug, or murder committed by a 
thug, of dacoity, of dacoity with murder, of belonging to a gang of dacoits, or of escaping from custody, may be 
inquired into or tried by  a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the accused person is 
found.  
(2) Any offence of kidnapping or abduction of a person may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose 
local jurisdiction the person was kidnapped or a bducted or was conveyed or concealed or detained.  
(3) Any offence of theft, extortion or robbery may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local 
jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property which is the subject of the offence w as possessed by 
any person committing it or by any person who received or retained such property knowing or having reason to 
believe it to be stolen property.  
(4) Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of criminal breach of trust may be inquired into or tried by a 
Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or any part of the property which is the subject of 
the offence was received or retained, or was required to be returned or accounted for, by the accused person.  
(5) Any offence which includes the possession of stolen property may be inquired into or tried by a Court 
within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property was possessed by any person who 
received or retained it knowing or having reason to b elieve it to be stolen property.  
182. Offences committed by letters, etc .—(1) Any offence which includes cheating may, if the deception is 
practised by means of letters or telecommunication messages, be inquired into or tried by any Court within whose 
local jurisdiction such letters or messages were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating and dishonestly 
inducing delivery of property may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the property 
was delivered by the person deceived or was received by the accused person.  
 (2) Any offence punishable under section 494 or section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be 
inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the off ender last 
resided with his or her spouse by the first marriage 1[, or the wife by the first marriage has taken up permanent 
residence after the commission of the offence].  
183. Offence committed on journey or voyage .—When an offence is committed whilst th e person by or 
against whom, or the thing in respect of which, the offence is committed is in the course of performing a journey or 
voyage, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court through or into whose local jurisdiction that person or 
thing p assed in the course of that journey or voyage.  
184. Place of trial for offences triable together .—Where — 
(a) the offences committed by any person are such that he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, 
each such offence by virtue of the provision s of section 219, section 220 or section 221, or  
(b) the offence or offences committed by several persons are such that they may be charged with and tried 
together by virtue of the provisions of section 223,  
the offences may be inquired into or tried by an y Court competent to inquire into or try any of the offences.  
185. Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the preceding provisions of this Chapter, the State Government may direct that any ca ses or class of cases committed 
for trial in any district may be tried in any sessions division:  
Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any direction previously issued by the High Court or the 
Supreme Court under the Constitution, or under this C ode or any other law for the time being in force.  
186. High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district where inquiry or trial shall take place .—Where two or 
more Courts have taken cognizance of the same offence and a question arises as to which of them ou ght to inquire 
into or try that offence, the question shall be decided — 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 15  (w.e.f. 18.12.1978).  107 
 (a) if the Courts are subordinate to the same High Court, by that High Court;  
(b) if the Courts are not subordinate to the same High Court, by the High Court within the local limits of  
whose appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceedings were first commenced,  
and thereupon all other proceedings in respect of that offence shall be discontinued.  
187. Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed beyond local jurisdiction .—(1) When a 
Magistrate of the first class sees reason to believe that any person within his local jurisdiction has committed outside 
such jurisdiction (whether within or outside India) an offence which cannot, under the provisions of sections 177 to 
185 (both in clusive), or any other law for the time being in force, be inquired into or tried within such jurisdiction 
but is under some law for the time being in force triable in India, such Magistrate may inquire into the offence as if 
it had been committed within s uch local jurisdiction and compel such person in the manner hereinbefore provided to 
appear before him, and send such person to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to inquire into or try such offence, or, 
if such offence is not punishable with death or impr isonment for life and such person is ready and willing to give 
bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate acting under this section, take a bond with or without sureties for his 
appearance before the Magistrate having such jurisdiction.  
(2) When there are more Magistrates than one having such jurisdiction and the Magistrate acting under this 
section cannot satisfy himself as to the Magistrate to or before whom such person should be sent or bound to appear, 
the case shall be reported for the orders of the Hi gh Court.                                                                             
188. Offence committed outside India. —When an offence is committed outside India — 
(a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or elsewhere; or  
(b) by a person, no t being such citizen, on any ship or aircraft registered in India,  
he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at any place within India at which he 
may be found:  
Provided that, notwithstanding anything in any of the precedi ng sections of this Chapter, no such offence shall 
be inquired into or tried in India except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
189. Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside India .—When any offence alleged to have 
been committed in a territory outside India is being inquired into or tried under the provisions of section 188, the 
Central Government may, if it thinks fit, direct that copies of depositions made or exhibits produced before a 
Judicial officer in or for that t erritory or before a diplomatic or consular representative of India in or for that territory 
shall be received as evidence by the Court holding such inquiry or trial in any case in which such Court might issue 
a commission for taking evidence as to the mat ters to which such depositions or exhibits relate.  
CHAPTER XIV  
CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS  
190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of 
the first class, and any Magistra te of the second class specially empowered in this behalf under sub -section (2), may 
take cognizance of any offence — 
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such offence;  
(b) upon a police report of such facts;  
(c) upon information receive d from any person other than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that 
such offence has been committed.  
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under 
sub-section (1) of such offences as ar e within his competence to inquire into or try.  
 108 
 STATE AMENDMENT S 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 190.- In section 190 of the said Code, in sub -section ( 1), after clause (c), following 
provisos shall be added,  namely: — 
“Provided that, no Magistrate shall  take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by any 
person who is or was a public servant as defined under any other law for the time being in force, while acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties, except with t he previous sanction under section 197 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or under any law for the time being in force:  
Provided further that, the sanctioning authority shall take a decision within a period of ninety days from the date 
of the receipt of the proposal for sanction and in case the sanctioning authority fails to take the decision within the 
said stipulated period of ninety days, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by the sanctioning 
authority. ”. 
[Vide Maharashtra  Act 33 of 2016, s. 3.]  
Assam  
In Section 190 of the Code, in sub -section ( 1), after the words “any Magistrate of  the first class” the words 
“any Executive Magistrate” shall be inserted;  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3(3) and the Schedule.]  
Manipur  
In sect ion 190 of the Code, after sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be added, 
namely:  — “(3) Any specified Executive Magistrate may, to the exclusion, of any other Magistrate take 
cognizance, under sub -section (1), of any offence specified in claus e (a) of sub -section (1) of section 4 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Manipur Second Amendment) Act 1984, and the reference in sub -
section (1) of this section to a Magistrate of the first class shall, in relation to such offence, be construed 
as referen ce to a Specified Executive Magistrate.”.  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
191. Transfer on application of the accused .—When a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence under 
clause (c) of sub -section  (1) of section 190, the accused s hall, before any evidence is taken, be informed that he is 
entitled to have the case inquired into or tried by another Magistrate, and if the accused or any of the accused, if 
there be more than one, objects to further proceedings before the Magistrate tak ing cognizance, the case shall be 
transferred to such other Magistrate as may be specified by the Chief Judicial Magistrate in this behalf.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
In Section 191 of the Code, the reference to “Chief Judicial Magistrate” Shall, in relation to  an offence taken 
cognizance of by an Executive Magistrate, be construed as a reference to the District Magistrate.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3( 3) and the Schedule.]  
Manipur  
 In section 191 of the In Section 191 of the Code, the reference to “Chief Ju dicial Magistrate” Shall, in 
relation to an offence taken cognizance of by an Specified Executive Magistrate, be construed as a 
reference to the District Magistrate.  
[Vide Manipur 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
192. Making over of cases to Magistrate s.—(1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of 
an offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial to any competent Magistrate subordinate to him . 
(2) Any Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Ma gistrate may, after taking 
cognizance of an offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial to such other competent Magistrate as the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the inquiry o r 
trial. 109 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
In Section 192 of the Code: — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), after the word “Any” the words “District Magistrate” shall be inserted;  
(ii) sub -section ( 2) shall be substituted as follows: — 
(2) Any Sub -divisional Magistrate or Magistr ate of the first class empowered in this behalf  by District 
Magist rate or Chief   Judicial Magistrate, as the case may be, may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make 
over the case for enquiry or trial to such other competent   Magistrate as the Distri ct Magistrate or   Chief Judicial 
Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the enquiry or 
trail. 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3( 3) and the Schedule.]  
Manipur  
 In section 192 of the Code, -- 
(i) in sub -section (1), after the word “Any”, the words “District Magistrate or” shall be inserted;  
(ii) for sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be substituted namely: -- 
 “(2) Any sub -Divisional Magistrate who is a Specified Executive Magistrate or any 
Magis trate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the District Magistrate or Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, as the case may be, may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make over the case 
for inquiry or trail to such other competent Magistrate as the Dis trict Magistrate or chief Judicial 
Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the 
inquiry or trial.”.  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
193. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session .—Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code or 
by any other law for the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence as a Court of 
original jurisdiction unless the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate und er this Code.  
194. Additional and Assistant Sessions Judges to try cases made over to them .—As Additional Sessions 
Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge shall try such cases as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or 
special order, make over to h im for trial or as the High Court may, by special order, direct him to try.  
195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences against public justice 
and for offences relating to documents given in evidence. —(1) No Court sha ll take cognizance — 
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 172 to 188 (both inclusive) of the Indian Penal Code,            
(45 of 1860), or  
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or  
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commi t such offence,  
except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public servant to whom he is 
administratively subordinate ; 
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the Indian Penal Code (4 5 of 1860), 
namely, sections 193 to 196 (both inclusive), 199, 200, 205 to 211 (both inclusive) and 228, when such offence 
is alleged to have been committed in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any Court, or  
(ii) of any offence described in section 463 , or punishable under section 471, section 475 or section 476, of 110 
 the said Code, when such offence is alleged to have been committed in respect of a document produced or given 
in evidence in a proceeding in any Court, or  
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to  commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment of, any offence specified 
in sub -clause (i) or sub -clause (ii), 
1[except on the complaint in writing of that Court  or by such officer of the Court as that Court may authorise in 
writing in this behalf , or of s ome other Court to which that Court is subordinate. ] 
(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant under clause (a) of sub -section (1) any authority to 
which he is administratively subordinate may order the withdrawal of the complaint and send a copy of such order to 
the Court; and upon its receipt by the Court, no further proceedings shall be taken on the complaint:  
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the Court of first instance has been concluded.  
(3) In clause (b) of sub -section (1), the term “Court ” means a Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court, and includes a 
tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the 
purposes of this section.  
(4) For the purposes o f clause (b) of sub -section (1), a Court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Court to 
which appeals ordinarily lie from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former Court, or in the case of a Civil 
Court from whose decrees no appeal ordinarily l ies, to the Principal Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction 
within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court is situate:  
Provided that — 
(a) where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of inferior jurisdiction shall be the Cour t 
to which such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate;  
(b) where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue Court, such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate 
to the Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the case or proceeding in connectio n with which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed.  
2[195A. Procedure for witnesses in case of threatening, etc .—A witness or any other person may file a 
complaint in relation to an offence under section 195A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]   
196. Prosecution for offences against the State and for criminal conspiracy to commit such offence. —(1) 
No Court shall take cognizance of — 
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VI or under section 153A,  3[section 295A or sub -section ( 1) of 
section 505 ] of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or  
(b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, or  
(c) any such abetment, as is described in section 108A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),  
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or o f the State Government.  
4[(1A) No Court shall take cognizance of — 
(a) any offence punishable under section 153B or sub -section (2) or sub -section (3) of section 505 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or  
(b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,  
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government or of the District 
Magistrate.]  
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of the offence of any criminal conspiracy punishable under section 120B of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), other than a criminal conspiracy to commit 5[an offence] punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, unless the State Government or 
the District Magistrate has consented in writing to the initiation of the proceedings:  
Provided that where the criminal conspiracy is one to which the provisions of section 195 apply, no such 
consent shall be necessary.  
 (3) The Central Government or the State Government may, before according sanction 6[under sub -section (1) 
or sub-section (1A) and the District Magistrate may, before according sanction under sub -section ( 1A)]  and the  
State Government or the District Magistrate may, before  giving consent under sub -section (2), order a preliminary 
investiga tion by a police officer not being below the rank of Inspector, in which case such police officer shall have 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 3 , for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.17 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 3, for “section  153B, section 295A or section 505” (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 16, for “a cognizable offence”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
6.  Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 3, for “under sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 2 3-9-1980).  111 
 the powers referred to in sub -section (3) of section 155.  
Manipur  
In section 196 of the Code, after sub -section (3), the following sub -section shal l be added, 
namely : — 
“(4) No Specified Executive Magistrate shall take cognizance of any offence except with the 
previous sanction of the state Government or such other authority or officer as it may, by order 
published in the official Gazette, specify.”.   
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants. —(1) When any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate 
or a public servant not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Governmen t is accused of any 
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, 
no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction  1[save as otherwise provided in the 
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013  (1 of 2014) ]— 
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the 
alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of the U nion, of the Central Government;  
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the 
alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of the State Government:  
2[Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a per son referred to in clause (b) during the period 
while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will 
apply as if for the expression “State Government ” occurring therein, the expression “Central Government ” were 
substituted.]  
3[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that no sanction shall be required in case of a 
public servant accused of any offence alleged to have been committed under section 166A, section 166B,                
section 354, section 3 54A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 370, section 375, 4[section 376A,  
section 376AB,  section 376C, section 376D , section 376DA , section 376DB ] or section 509 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860) .] 
 (2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by any member of the 
Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, except with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government.  
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of sub -section (2) shall apply to such 
class or category of the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order as may be specified 
therein, wherever they may be s erving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub -section will apply as if for the 
expression “Central Government ” occurring therein, the expression “State Government ” were substituted.  
5[(3A)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (3), no court  shall take cognizance of any offence, 
alleged to have been committed by any member of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order in a 
State while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proc lamation 
issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government.  
(3B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code or any other law, it is hereby decla red that any 
sanction accorded by the State Government or any cognizance taken by a court upon such sanction, during the period 
commencing  on the 20th day of August, 1991 and ending with the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
Code of Crimina l Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1991 (43 of 1991), receives the assent of the President, with respect to an 
offence alleged to have been committed during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of 
the Constitution was in force i n the State, shall be invalid and it shall be competent for the Central Government in such 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2014, s. 58 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 16 -1-2014).  
2. Added by Act 43 of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -5-1991).  
3. Explanation  ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 18 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 15, for “section 376A, sec tion 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1991, s. 2  (w.e.f. 2 -5-1991).  112 
 matter to accord sanction and for the court to take cognizance thereon.]  
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may determine the pe rson by whom, 
the manner in which, and the offence or offences for which, the prosecution of such Judge, Magistrate or  public 
servant is to be conducted, and may specify the Court before which the trial is to be held.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Tripura.  — 
Insertion of a new Section 197(IA) .—In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in section 197 after                 
sub-section (I) the following sub -section shall be inserted, only for application in the State of Tripura, 
namely: — 
“(IA) When as per provision of any r elevant law for the time being in force a public servant referred 
to in Sub -Section ( 1) (b) is directly appointed, transferred or posted by the State Government in any local 
or other authorities including a Government Company, Corporation or Public Sector Undertaking, he 
shall be deemed to be employed in connection with the affairs of the State and no Court shall take 
cognizance of any offence as referred to in Sub -Section (I) without previous sanction of the State 
Government.  
[Vide Tripura Act 6 of 2003, s . 2] 
Assam. — 
In Section 197 of the Code. — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “in the discharge of ” the words “in or in connection with  
the discharge of ” shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for the words “in the discharge of ” the words “in or in connection with 
the discharge of ” shall be substituted;  
(c) after sub -section ( 4), the fallowing subsections shall be inserted, namely:  — 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, — 
(a) where a complaint is made to a Court against a public ser vant belonging to any class or 
category specified under sub -section ( 3) alleging that he has committed an offence, the Court shall 
postpone the issue of process  against the accused and make a reference to the State Government; or  
(b) where an accused, eith er by himself or through a pleader, claims before a Court that he 
belongs to any class or category specified under sub -section ( 3) and that the offence alleged to have 
been committed by him arose out of any action taken by him while acting or purporting to  act in or 
in connection with the discharge of his official duty, the Court shall forthwith stay further 
proceedings and make a reference to the State Government.  
(6) (i) Where a reference is received from a Court under sub -section ( 5), the State Governmen t 
shall issue a certificate to the Court that the accused person was or was not acting or purporting to act 
in, or in connection with the discharge of his official duty.  
(ii) If the State Government certifies that the accused was acting or purporting to ac t in or in 
connection with the discharge of his official duty, the Court shall dismiss the complaint or 
discharge the accused:  
Provided that the complainant may, within sixty days from the date of the issue of such 
certificate prefer an appeal to the High Court against the Certificate:  
Provided further that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period 
of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
the appeal within the sai d period.  113 
 (iii) If the State Government certifies that the accused was not acting or purporting to act in or in 
connection with, the discharge of his official duty, the Court may proceed further with the 
complaint in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
(7) The provisions of sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6) shall apply to all proceedings pending on the date of 
commencement of this Act in respect of which a Court had taken cognizance of an offence in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
[Vide Assam A ct 3 of 1984, s. 4]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 197 .—In the Explanation to the section 197 of the principal Act, for the words, 
figures and letters “section 166A, section 166B, section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, 
section 354D,  section 370, section 375, section 376, section 376A, section 376C, section 376D or section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code “the words, figures and letters “section 166A, section 166B, section 354, 
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, secti on 370, section 375, section 376, section 
376A, section 376AA, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA or section 509 of the Indian Penal 
Code shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 17]  
198. Prosecution for offences against marri age.—(1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence 
punishable under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some person 
aggrieved by the offence:  
Provided that — 
(a) where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or 
infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not 
to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Cour t, make a complaint on his 
or her behalf;  
(b) where such person is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed Forces of the Union under 
conditions which are certified by his Commanding Officer as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to  
enable him to make a complaint in person, some other person authorised by the husband in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf;  
(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under 1[section 494 or secti on 495] of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) is the wife, complaint may be made on her behalf by her father, mother, brother, sister, 
son or daughter or by her father ’s or mother ’s brother or sister  2[, or, with the leave of the Court, by any other 
perso n related to her by blood, marriage or adoption].   
(2) For the purposes of sub -section (1), no person other than the husband of the woman shall be deemed to be 
aggrieved by any offence punishable under section 497 or section 498 of the said Code:  
Provided  that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care of the woman on his behalf at the time 
when such offence was committed may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his behalf.  
(3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the prov iso to sub -section  (1), the complaint is sought to be 
made on behalf of a person under the age of eighteen years or of a lunatic by a person who has not been appointed or 
declared by a competent authority to be the guardian of the person of the minor or lu natic, and the Court is satisfied 
that there is a guardian so appointed or declared, the Court shall, before granting the application for leave, cause 
notice to be given to such guardian and give him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(4) The authori sation referred to in clause (b) of the proviso to sub -section (1), shall be in writing, shall be 
signed or otherwise attested by the husband, shall contain a statement to the effect that he has been informed of the 
allegations upon which the complaint is to be founded, shall be countersigned by his Commanding Officer, and shall 
be accompanied by a certificate signed by that Officer to the effect that leave of absence for the purpose of making a 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 1 7, for “section 494” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by s. 17,  ibid. (w.e.f.  18 -12-1978).  114 
 complaint in person cannot for the time being be granted to th e husband.  
(5) Any document purporting to be such an authorisation and complying with the provisions of sub -section (4), 
and any document purporting to be a certificate required by that sub -section shall, unless the contrary is proved, be 
presumed to be ge nuine and shall be received in evidence.  
(6) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860), where such offence consists of sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife being 
under 1[eighteen  years of age] , if more than one year has elapsed from the date of the commission of the 
offence.  
(7) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment of, or attempt to commit, an offence as they 
apply to the offence.  
2[198A. Prosecution of offences un der section 498A of the Indian Penal Code. —No Court shall 
take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1 860) 
except upon a police report of facts which constitute such offence or upon a complaint made by  the  
person  aggrieved  by  the  offence or by her father, mother, brother, sister or by her father’s or mother’s 
brother or sister or, with the leave of the Court, by any other person related to her by blood, marriage or 
adoption.]  
3[198B. Cognizance of offenc e.—No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
section 376B of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) where the persons are in a marital relationship, 
except upon prima facie  satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a comp laint having 
been filed or made by the wife against the husband.]  
199. Prosecution for defamation. —(1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some pers on 
aggrieved by the offence:  
Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is 
from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs 
and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the 
Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, when any offence falling under Chapter XXI of 
the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860) is alleged to have been committed against a person who, at the time of 
such commission, is the President of India, the Vice -President of India, the Governor of a State, the 
Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister of the Union or of a Sta te or of a Union territory, or any 
other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his 
conduct in the discharge of his public functions a Court of Session may take cognizance of such offence, 
without th e case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing made by the Public Prosecutor.  
 (3) Every complaint referred to in sub -section (2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the offence 
alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particula rs as are reasonably sufficient to give notice to 
the accused of the offence alleged to have been committed by him.  
(4) No complaint under sub -section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the 
previous sanction — 
(a) of the State Government , in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State 
or a Minister of that Government;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 18 , for “fifteen years of age”  (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 5 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 19 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).   115 
 (b) of the State Government, in the case of any other public servant employed in connection with 
the affairs of the State;  
(c) of the Central Governme nt, in any other case.  
(5) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence under sub -section (2) unless the 
complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the offence is alleged to 
have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence before a Magistrate having 
jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence upon such co mplaint.  
CHAPTER XV  
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES  
200. Examination of complainant. —A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on complaint 
shall examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and the substance of such 
examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant and the witnesses, and 
also by the Magistrate:  
Provided that, when the complaint is made in writing, the Magistrate need not examine the 
complainant and the witnesses — 
(a) if a public servant act ing or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties or a Court 
has made the complaint; or  
(b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry or trial to another Magistrate under                  
section 192:  
Provided further that if the Magi strate makes over the case to another Magistrate under section 192 
after examining the complainant and the witnesses, the latter Magistrate need not re -examine them.  
201. Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of the case .—If the complain t is 
made to a Magistrate who is not competent to take cognizance of the offence, he shall, — 
(a) if the complaint is in writing, return it for presentation to the proper Court with an 
endorsement to that effect;  
(b) if the complaint is not in writing, dire ct the complainant to the proper Court.  
202. Postponement of issue of process. —(1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence 
of which he is authorised to take cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 192, may, 
if he thinks fit, 1[and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he 
exercises his jurisdiction ,] postpone the issue of process against the accused, and either inquire into the 
case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks 
fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding:  
Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made, —   
(a) where it appears to the Magistrate t hat the offence complained of is triable exclusively by the 
Court of Session; or  
 (b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant and the witnesses 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 19 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  116 
 present (if any) have been examined on oath under section 200.  
(2) In an inquir y under sub -section (1), the Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, take evidence of witnesses 
on oath:  
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable exclusively by 
the Court of Session, he shall call upon the complaina nt to produce all his witnesses and examine them on 
oath.  
(3) If an investigation under sub -section (1) is made by a person not being a police officer, he shall 
have for that investigation all the powers conferred by this Code on an officer in charge of a police station 
except the power to arrest without warrant.  
203. Dismissal of complaint. —If, after considering the statements on oath (if any) of the 
complainant and of the witnesses and the result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 202,  
the Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall dismiss the 
complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly record his reasons for so doing.  
 
CHAPTER XVI  
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES  
204. Issue  of process. —(1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence there is 
sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be — 
(a) a summons -case, he shall issue his summons for the attendance of the accused, or  
(b) a warrant -case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused 
to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such Magistrate or (if he has no jurisdiction 
himself) some other Magistrate having jurisdiction.  
(2) No summons or warr ant shall be issued against the accused under sub -section ( 1) until a list of the 
prosecution witnesses has been filed.  
(3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing, every summons or warrant issued 
under sub -section (1) shall be accompan ied by a copy of such complaint.  
(4) When by any law for the time being in force any process -fees or other fees are payable, no process 
shall be issued until the fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid within a reasonable time, the 
Magistrate may dism iss the complaint.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of section 87.  
205. Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused. —(1) Whenever a Magistrate 
issues a summons, he may, if he sees reason so to do, dispens e with the personal attendance of the 
accused and permit him to appear by his pleader.  
 (2) But the Magistrate inquiring into or trying the case may, in his discretion, at any stage of the 
proceedings, direct the personal attendance of the accused, and, if  necessary, enforce such attendance in 
the manner hereinbefore provided.  
206. Special summons in cases of petty offence. —(1) If, in the opinion of a Magistrate taking 
cognizance of a petty offence, the case may be summarily disposed of under section 260  1[or section 261] , 
the Magistrate shall, except where he is, for reasons to be recorded in writing of a contrary opinion, issue 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 20 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006) . 117 
 summons to the accused requiring him either to appear in person or by pleader before the Magistrate on a 
specified date, or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, to 
transmit before the specified date, by post or by messenger to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and 
the amount of fine specified in the summons or if he desires to ap pear by pleader and to plead guilty to 
the charge through such pleader, to authorise, in writing, the pleader to plead guilty to the charge on his 
behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader:  
Provided that the amount of the fine specified in such summo ns shall not exceed 1[one thousand  
rupees ]. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, “petty offence ” means any offence punishable only with fine 
not exceeding one thousand rupees, but does not include any offence so punishable under the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 19 39 (4 of 1939)2, or under any other law which provides for convicting the accused 
person in his absence on a plea of guilty.  
3[(3) The State Government may, by notification, specially empower any Magistrate to exercise 
the powers conferred by sub -section (1) in relation to any offence which is compoundable under 
section 320 or any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, or 
with fine, or with both where the Magistrate is of opinion that, having regard to the facts and 
circumstances of the case, the imposition of fine only would meet the ends of justice.]  
207. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents. —In any case where 
the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, the Magistrate shall witho ut delay furnish to the 
accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the following :— 
(i) the police report;  
(ii) the first information report recorded under section 154;  
(iii) the statements recorded under sub -section (3) of section 161 of all persons whom the  
prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses, excluding therefrom any part in regard to 
which a request for such exclusion has been made by the police officer under sub -section (6) of 
section 173;  
(iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under section 164;  
(v) any other document or relevant extract thereof forwarded to the Magistrate with the police 
report under sub -section (5) of section 173:  
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of a statement as is referred to i n            
clause  (iii) and considering the reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct that a copy 
of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the Magistrate thinks proper, shall be 
furnished to the accused:  
Provided fur ther that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any document referred to in clause (v) is 
voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only 
be allowed to inspect it either personally or through pleader in C ourt.  
208. Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in other cases triable by 
Court of Session. —Where, in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the 
Magistrate issuing process under section 204 that the offence is  triable exclusively by the Court of 
Session, the Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the 
following: — 
(i) the statements recorded under section 200 or section 202, of all persons examined by the 
Magistrate ; 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 25 of 2005,  s. 20,  for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Now the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59  of 1988).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 18 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).   118 
 (ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded under section 161 or section 164;  
(iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate on which the prosecution proposes to 
rely:  
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such  document is v oluminous, he shall, instead 
of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it either 
personally or through pleader in Court.  
209. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable exclusively by it.—When in 
a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate 
and it appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall — 
1[(a) commit, after complying  with the provisions of section 207 or section 208, as the case may 
be, the case to the Court of Session, and subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand 
the accused to custody until such commitment has been made;]  
(b) subject to the pr ovisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused to custody during, 
and until the conclusion of, the trial;  
(c) send to that Court the record of the case and the documents and articles, if any, which are to 
be produced in evidence;  
(d) notify the  Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the case to the Court of Session.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In section  209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to the State of Gujarat , for 
clause ( a), the following clause shall be substituted,  namely: — 
“(a) Commit the case, after complying with the provisions of section  207 or section  208, as the case 
may be, to the Court of Session and, subject to the provisions of this Code  relating to bail, remand the accused 
to custody until such commitment  has been made ”. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 30 of 1976, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 209 of the said Code, for clauses (a) and (b), the following clauses shall be substituted and 
be deemed always to have been substituted, namely : — 
“(a) as soon as may be after co mplying with the provisions of section 207, commit the case to the 
court of session ;  
(b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused to custody until 
commitment of the case under clause (a) and thereafter during, and until the conclusion of the trial.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 6]  
210. Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case and police investigation in respect 
of the same offence .—(1) When in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report (h ereinafter 
referred to as a complaint case), it is made to appear to the Magistrate, during the course of the inquiry or 
trial held by him, that an investigation by the police is in progress in relation to the offence which is the 
subject -matter of the inq uiry or trial held by him, the Magistrate shall stay the proceedings of such inquiry 
or trial and call for a report on the matter from the police officer conducting the investigation.  
 
(2) If a report is made by the investigating police officer under secti on 173 and on such report 
cognizance of any offence is taken by the Magistrate against any person who is an accused in the 
complaint case, the Magistrate shall inquire into or try together the complaint case and the case arising out 
of the police report as  if both the cases were instituted on a police report.  
 
(3) If the police report does not relate to any accused in the complaint case or if the Magistrate does 
not take cognizance of any offence on the police report, he shall proceed with the inquiry or tr ial, which 
was stayed by him, in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 19, for cl ause (a) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978). 119 
 CHAPTER XVII  
THE CHARGE  
A.—Form of charges  
211. Contents of charge. —(1) Every charge under this Code shall state the offence with which the 
accused is charged.  
 (2) If the law w hich creates the offence gives it any specific name, the offence may be described in 
the charge by that name only.  
(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any specific name, so much of the definition 
of the offence must be stated as to gi ve the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged.  
(4) The law and section of the law against which the offence is said to have been committed shall be 
mentioned in the charge.  
(5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a statement th at every legal condition required by 
law to constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular case.  
(6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court.  
(7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any offence, is liable, b y reason of such 
previous conviction, to enhanced punishment, or to punishment of a different kind, for a subsequent 
offence, and it is intended to prove such previous conviction for the purpose of affecting the punishment 
which the Court may think fit to award for the subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of the previous 
conviction shall be stated in the charge; and if such statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at 
any time before sentence is passed.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is charged with the  murder of B. This is equivalent to a statement that A's act fell within the definition of murder 
given in sections 299 and 300 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); that it did not fall within any of the general exception s 
of the said Code; and that it d id not fall within any of the five exceptions to section 300, or that, if it did fall within 
Exception 1, one or other of the three provis os to that exception applied to it.  
(b) A is charged under section 326 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with vol untarily causing grievous hurt to B 
by means of an instrument for shooting. This is equivalent to a statement that the case was not provided for by section 335 
of the said Code, and that the general exceptions did not apply to it.  
(c) A is accused of murde r, cheating, theft, extortion, adultery or criminal intimidation, or using a false property -mark. 
The charge may state that A committed murder, or cheating, or theft, or extortion, or adultery, or criminal intimidation, or 
that he used a false property -mark, without reference to the definition s, of those crimes contained in the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860); but the sections under which the offence is punishable must, in each instance be referred to in the charge.  
(d) A is charged under section 184 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) with intentionally obstructing a sale of 
property offered for sale by the lawful authority of a public servant. The charge should be in those words.  
212. Particulars as to time, place and person. —(1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to 
the time and place of the alleged offence, and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in 
respect of which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter 
with which he is char ged. 
(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or dishonest misappropriation of money 
or other movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be, describe 120 
 the movable property in respect of which t he offence is alleged to have been committed, and the dates 
between which the offence is alleged to have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact 
dates, and the charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the m eaning of 
section 219:  
Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates shall not exceed one year.  
213. When manner of committing offence must be stated. —When the nature of the case is such 
that the particulars mentioned in sections  211 and 212 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the 
matter with which he is charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the 
alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose . 
Illustrations  
(a) A is accused of the theft of a certain article at a certain time and place. The charge need not set out the manner in 
which the theft was effected.  
(b) A is accused of cheating B at a given time and place. The charge must set out the manner in which A che ated B.  
(c) A is accused of giving false evidence at a given time and place. The charge must set out that portion of the evidence 
given by A which is alleged to be false.  
(d) A is accused of obstructing B, a public servant, in the discharge of his public f unctions at a given time and place. 
The charge must set out the manner in which A obstructed B in the discharge of his functions.  
(e) A is accused of the murder of B at a given time and place. The charge need not state the manner in which A 
murdered B.  
(f) A is accused of disobeying a direction of the law with intent to save B from punishment. The charge must set out the 
disobedience charged and the law infringed.  
214. Words in charge taken in sense of law under which offence is punishable. —In every charge 
words used in describing an offence shall be deemed to have been used in the sense attached to them 
respectively by the law under which such offence is punishable.  
215. Effect of errors. — No error in stating either the offence or the particulars required t o be stated 
in the charge, and no omission to state the offence or those particulars, shall be regarded at any  stage of 
the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such error or omission, and it has 
occasioned a failure of justice.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is charged under section 242 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with “having been in possession of 
counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed thereof that  such coin was counterfeit ,” the word 
“fraudulently ” being omitted in the charge. Unless it appears that A was in fact misled by this omission, the error shall not 
be regarded as material.  
(b) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out in the charge or is set out 
incorrectl y. A defends himself, calls witnesses and gives his own account of the transaction. The Court may infer from this 
that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating is not material.  
(c) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out in the charge. There were many 
transactions between A and B, and A had no means of knowing to which of them the charge referred, and offered no 
defence. The Court may infer from such facts that the omission to set out the manner of the che ating was, in the case, a 
material error.  
(d) A is charged with the murder of Khoda Baksh on the 21st January, 1882. In fact, the murdered person's name was 
Haidar Baksh, and the date of the murder was the 20th January, 1882. A was never charged with any m urder but one, and 121 
 had heard the inquiry before the Magistrate, which referred exclusively to the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer 
from these facts that A was not misled, and that the error in the charge was immaterial.  
(e) A was charged with murd ering Haidar Baksh on the 20th January, 1882, and Khoda Baksh (who tried to arrest him 
for that murder) on the 21st January, 1882. When charged for the murder of Haidar Baksh, he was tried for the murder of 
Khoda Baksh. The witnesses present in his defence  were witnesses in the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer from 
this that A was misled, and that the error was material.  
216. Court may alter charge .—(1) Any Court may alter or add to any charge at any time before 
judgment is pronounced.  
(2) Every su ch alteration or addition shall be read and explained to the accused.  
(3) If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is not 
likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused in his defence or th e prosecutor in the conduct 
of the case, the Court may, in its discretion, after such alteration or addition has been made, proceed with 
the trial as if the altered or added charge had been the original charge.  
(4) If the alteration or addition is such tha t proceeding immediately with the trial is likely, in the 
opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as aforesaid, the Court may either direct a 
new trial or adjourn the trial for such period as may be necessary.  
(5) If the offence st ated in the altered or added charge is one for the prosecution of which previous 
sanction is necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such sanction is obtained, unless sanction 
has been already obtained for a prosecution on the same facts as t hose on which the altered or added 
charge is founded.  
217. Recall of witnesses when charge altered. —Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the 
Court after the commencement of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed — 
(a) to recall or  re-summon, and examine with reference to such alteration or addition, any witness 
who may have been examined, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers that 
the prosecutor or the accused, as the case may be, desires to recall or r e-examine such witness for the 
purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice;  
(b) also to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be material.  
B.—Joinder of charges  
218. Separate charges for distinct offences. —(1) For every  distinct offence of which any person is 
accused there shall be a separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately:  
Provided that where the accused person, by an application in writing, so desires and the Magistrate is 
of opinion that such person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the Magistrate may try together all or 
any number of the charges framed against such person.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section (1) shall affect the operation of the provisions of sections 219, 220, 221 
and 223.  
Illustration  
A is accused of a theft on one occasion, and of causing grievous hurt on another occasion. A must be separately charged and 
separately tried for the theft and causing grievous hurt.  
219. Three offences of same kind within year may be charged togeth er.—(1) When a person is 122 
 accused of more offences than one of the same kind committed within the space of twelve months from 
the first to the last of such offences, whether in respect of the same person or not, he may be charged with, 
and tried at one tria l for, any number of them not exceeding three.  
(2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with the same amount of punishment 
under the same section of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or of any special or local law:  
Provided that, for the  purposes of this section, an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an offence punishable 
under section 380 of the said Code, and that an offence punishable under any  section of the said Code, or 
of any special or local law, shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an attempt to commit 
such offence, when such an attempt is an offence.  
220. Trial for more than one offence. —(1) If, in one series of acts so co nnected together as to form 
the same transaction, more offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged with, 
and tried at one trial for, every such offence.  
(2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal breach of tru st or dishonest 
misappropriation of property as provided in sub -section (2) of section 212 or in sub -section (1) of section 
219, is accused of committing, for the purpose of facilitating or concealing the commission of that offence 
or those offences, one o r more offences of falsification of accounts, he may be charged with, and tried at 
one trial for, every such offence.  
(3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law 
in force for the time being by wh ich offences are defined or punished, the person accused of them may be 
charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences.  
(4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an offence, 
constitute when  combined a different offence, the person accused of them may be charged with, and tried 
at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts when combined, and for any offence constituted by 
any one, or more, of such acts.  
(5) Nothing contained in this s ection shall affect section 71 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
Illustrations to sub -section (1) 
(a) A rescues B, a person in lawful custody, and in so doing causes grievous hurt to C, a constable in whose custody B 
was. A may be charged with, and co nvicted of, offences under sections 225 and 333 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(b) A commits house -breaking by day with intent to commit adultery, and commits, in the house so entered, adultery 
with B's wife. A may be separately charged with, and c onvicted of, offences under sections 454 and 497 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
(c) A entices B, the wife of C, away from C, with intent to commit adultery with B, and then commits adultery with 
her. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 498 and 497 of the Indian Penal Code         
(45 of 1860).  
(d) A has in his possession several seals, knowing them to be counterfeit and intending to use them for the purpose of 
committing several forgeries punishable under sect ion 466 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). A may be separately 
charged with, and convicted of , the possession of each seal under section 473 of the Indian Penal Code.  
(e) With intent to cause injury to B, A institutes a criminal proceeding against him,  knowing that there is no just or 
lawful ground for such proceeding, and also falsely accuses B of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just 
or lawful ground for such charge. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, two offences  under section 211 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  123 
 (f) A, with intent to cause injury to B, falsely accuses him of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just 
or lawful ground for such charge. On the trial, A gives false evidence agai nst B, intending thereby to cause B to be 
convicted of a capital offence. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 211 and 194 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(g) A, with six others, commits the offences of rioting , grievous hurt and assaulting a public servant endeavouring in 
the discharge of his duty as such to suppress the riot. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under 
sections 147, 325 and 152 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
 (h) A threatens B, C and D at the same time with injury to their persons with intent to cause alarm to them. A may be 
separately charged with, and convicted of, each of the three offences under section 506 of the Indian Penal Code                          
(45 of 1860).  
The separate charges referred to in illustrations (a) to (h), respectively, may be tried at the same time.  
Illustrations to sub -section (3) 
(i) A wrongfully strikes B with a cane. A may be separately charged with , and convicted of, offences unde r sections 
352 and 323 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(j) Several stolen sacks of corn are made over to A and B, who knew they are stolen property, for the purpose of 
concealing them. A and B thereupon voluntarily assist each other to conceal the s acks at the bottom of a grain -pit. A and B 
may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 411 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code                    
(45 of 1860).  
(k) A exposes her child with the knowledge that she is thereby likely  to cause its death. The child dies in consequence of 
such exposure. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 317 and 304 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
(l) A dishonestly uses a forged document as genuine evidence , in order to convict B, a public servant, of an offence 
under section 167 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences 
under sections 471 (read with section 466) and 196 of that Code.  
Illustration to sub-section (4) 
(m) A commits robbery on B, and in doing so voluntarily causes hurt to him. A may be separately charged with, and 
convicted of, offences under sections 323, 392 and 394 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
221. Where it is doubtful what o ffence has been committed. —(1) If a single act or series of acts is 
of such a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute, 
the accused may be charged with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such 
charges may be tried at once; or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed some one of 
the said offences.  
(2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one offence, and it appears in evidence that he 
committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under the provisions of sub -section 
(1), he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to have committed, although he was not 
charged with it.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is accused of an act which may amount to theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating. He 
may be charged with theft, receiving stolen property, criminal breach of trust and cheating, or he may be charged with having  
committed theft, or receiving stolen pr operty, or criminal breach of trust or cheating.  
(b) In the case mentioned, A is only charged with theft. It appears that he committed the offence of criminal breach of trust, or  
that of receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted of criminal breach of tru st or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may be), 
though he was not charged with such offence.  
(c) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he saw B hit C with a club. Before the Sessions Court A states on oath that B 
never hit C. A may be charged i n the alternative and convicted of   intentionally giving false evidence, although it cannot be proved 
which of these contradictory statements was false.  124 
 222. When offence proved included in offence charged. —(1) When a person is charged with an 
offence cons isting of several particulars, a combination of some only of which constitutes a complete 
minor offence, and such combination is proved, but the remaining particulars are not proved, he may be 
convicted of the minor offence, though he was not charged with it. 
(2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved which reduce it to a minor offence, 
he may be convicted of the minor offence, although he is not charged with it.  
(3) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to commit such 
offence although the attempt is not separately charged.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a conviction of any minor offence where the 
conditions requisite for the initiation of proceedings in respect of that mi nor offence have not been 
satisfied.   
Illustrations  
(a) A is charged, under section 407 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with criminal breach of trust in respect of 
property entrusted to him as a carrier. It appears, that he did commit criminal breac h of trust under section 406 of that Code 
in respect of the property, but that it was not entrusted to him as a carrier. He may be convicted of criminal breach of trus t 
under the said section 406.  
(b) A is charged, under section 325 of the Indian Penal Cod e (45 of 1860), with causing grievous hurt. He proves that 
he acted on grave and sudden provocation. He may be convicted under section 335 of that Code.  
223. What persons may be charged jointly. —The following persons may be charged and tried 
together, name ly:— 
(a) persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same transaction;  
(b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment of, or attempt to commit, such 
offence;  
(c) persons accused of more than one offence of the same  kind, within the meaning of section 219 
committed by them jointly within the period of twelve months;  
(d) persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same transaction;  
(e) persons accused of an offence which includes theft, extort ion, cheating, or criminal 
misappropriation, and persons accused of receiving or retaining, or assisting in the disposal or 
concealment of, property possession of which is alleged to have been transferred by any such offence 
committed by the first -named pe rsons, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such last -
named offence;  
(f) persons accused of offences under sections 411 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
or either of those sections in respect of stolen property the possession of which  has been transferred 
by one offence;  
(g) persons accused of any offence under Chapter XII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
relating to counterfeit coin and persons accused of any other offence under the said Chapter relating 125 
 to the same coin, or of a betment of or attempting to commit any such offence; and the provisions 
contained in the former part of this Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to all such charges:  
Provided that where a number of persons are charged with separate offences and such per sons do not 
fall within any of the categories specified in this section, the 1[Magistrate  or Court of Session]  may, if 
such persons by an application in writing, so desire, and 2[if he or it is satisfied ] that such persons would 
not be prejudicially affect ed thereby, and it is expedient so to do, try all such persons together.  
224. Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of several charges. —When a charge 
containing more heads than one is framed against the same person, and when a conviction has  been had 
on one or more of them, the complainant, or the officer conducting the prosecution, may, with the consent 
of the Court, withdraw the remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay the 
inquiry into, or trial of, such charge o r charges and such withdrawal shall have the effect of an acquittal 
on such charge or charges, unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the said Court (subject to the 
order of the Court setting aside the conviction) may proceed with the inquiry in to, or trial o f, the charge or  
charges so withdrawn . 
CHAPTER XVIII  
TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION  
225. Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor. —In every trial before a Court of Session, the 
prosecution shall be conducted by a Public Prosecutor.  
226. Op ening case for prosecution. —When the accused appears or is brought before the Court in 
pursuance of a commitment of the case under section 209, the prosecutor shall open his case by 
describing the charge brought against the accused and stating by what evid ence he proposes to prove the 
guilt of the accused.  
227. Discharge .—If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted 
therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge 
consi ders that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the 
accused and record his reasons for so doing.  
228. Framing of charge. —(1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of 
opinion that  there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence which — 
 (a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge against the accused 
and, by order, transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate,  3[or any other Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class and direct the accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or, 
as the case may be, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as he deems fit , and 
thereupon such Magistrate]  shall try the offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of 
warrant -cases instituted on a police report;  
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused.  
(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under  clause (b) of sub -section (1), the charge shall be read 
and explained to the accused and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence 
charged or claims to be tried.   
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 21, for “Magistrate” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 22,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  126 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In sub -section ( 2) of section 228  of the Principal Act, after the word “to the accused ” the following shall be 
added, namely:  — 
“present in person of through the medium of electronic video linkage and being represented by his pleader in the 
Court. ” 
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 13 of 2006, s. 4.] 
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 228 .- In section 228 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 
of 1974), in sub -section ( 1), in clause ( a), for the words “to the Chief Judicial Magistrate and thereupon 
the Chief Judicial Magistrate ” the words “to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to any Judicial Magistrate 
competent to try the case and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate or such other Judicial magistrate to 
whom the case may have been transferred ” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Karnataka  Act 22 of  1994, s. 2.]  
West Bengal  
In section 228  of the said Code , in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 228, for the words “to the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate ” the words “to the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or to any Judicial Magistrate competent to try the case, and thereupon the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or such other Judicial Magistrate to whom the case may have been transferred ” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 63 of 1978, s. 3.]  
229. Conviction on plea of guilty. —If the accused pleads guilty, the Judge shall record the plea and may, in his 
discretion, convict him thereon.  
230. Date for prosecution evidence. —If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or 
is not convicted unde r section 229, the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of witnesses, and may, on the 
application of the prosecution, issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the production of 
any document or other thing.  
231. Evidence for p rosecution. —(1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall proceed to take all such evidence as 
may be produced in support of the prosecution.  
(2) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross -examination of any witness to be deferred until any other 
witne ss or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for further cross -examination.  
232. Acquittal. —If, after taking the evidence for the prosecution, examining the accused and hearing the 
prosecution and the defence on the point, the Judge considers t hat there is no evidence that the accused committed 
the offence, the Judge shall record an order of acquittal.  
233. Entering upon defence. —(1) Where the accused is not acquitted under section 232, he shall be called 
upon to enter on his defence and adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof.  
(2) If the accused puts in any written statement, the Judge shall file it with the record.  
(3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the 
production o f any document or thing, the Judge shall issue such process unless he considers, for reasons to be 
recorded, that such application should be refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay 
or for defeating the ends of justice.  
234. Arguments. —When the examination of the witnesses (if any) for the defence is complete, the prosecutor 127 
 shall sum up his case and the accused or his pleader shall be entitled to reply:  
Provided that where any point of law is raised by the accused or his p leader, the prosecution may, with the 
permission of the Judge, make his submissions with regard to such point of law.  
235. Judgment of acquittal or conviction .—(1) After hearing arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge 
shall give a judgment in the c ase. 
(2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of             
section 360, hear the accused on the questions of sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to law.  
236. Previous conviction. —In a case where a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of              
sub-section (7) of section 211, and the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as alleged in 
the charge, the Judge may, after he has convicted the said accused under section 229 or section 235, take evidence in 
respect of the alleged previous conviction, and shall record a finding thereon:  
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Judge nor shall the accused be asked to plead thereto nor 
shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the 
accused has been convicted under section 229 or section 235.  
237. Procedure in cases instituted under section 199( 2).—(1) A Court of Sess ion taking cognizance of an 
offence under sub -section (2) of section 199 shall try the case in accordance with the procedure for the trial of 
warrant -cases instituted otherwise than on a police report before a Court of Magistrate:  
Provided that the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed shall, unless the Court of 
Session, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise directs, be examined as a witness for the prosecution.  
(2) Every trial under this section shall be held in camera  if either  party thereto so desires or if the Court thinks 
fit so to do.  
(3) If, in any such case, the Court discharges or acquits all or any of the accused and is of opinion that there was 
no reasonable cause for making the accusation against them or any of them, i t may, by its order of discharge or 
acquittal, direct the person against whom the offence was alleged to have been committed (other than the President, 
Vice -President or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory) to show cause why h e should 
not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused, when there are more than one.  
(4) The Court shall record and consider any cause which may be shown by the person so directed, and if it is 
satisfied that there was no reasonab le cause for making the accusation, it may, for reasons to be recorded, make an 
order that compensation to such amount not exceeding one thousand rupees, as it may determine, be paid by such 
person to the accused or to each or any of them.  
(5) Compensation  awarded under sub -section (4) shall be recovered as if it were a fine imposed by a Magistrate.  
(6) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under sub -section (4) shall, by reason of such order, 
be exempted from any civil or criminal liability i n respect of the complaint made under this section:  
Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken into account in awarding 
compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter.  
(7) The person who has been ordered under sub -section ( 4) to pay compensation may appeal from the order, in 
so far as it relates to the payment of compensation, to the High Court.  
 (8) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made, the com pensation shall not be 
paid to him before the period allowed for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, 
before the appeal has been decided.  128 
 CHAPTER XIX  
TRIAL OF WARRANT -CASES BY MAGISTRATES  
A.—Cases instituted on a poli ce report  
238. Compliance with section 207 .—When, in any warrant -case instituted on a police report, the accused 
appears or is brought before a Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the Magistrate shall satisfy himself that 
he has complied with the provisions of section 207.  
239. When accused shall be discharged .—If, upon considering the police report and the documents sent with 
it under section 173 and making such examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks necessary and 
after givin g the prosecution and the accused an opportunity of being heard, the Magistrate considers the charge 
against the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge the accused, and record his reasons for so doing.  
240. Framing of charge .—(1) If, upon such consid eration, examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate is 
of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence triable under this Chapter, 
which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his opinion, could be a dequately punished by him, he shall 
frame in writing a charge against the accused.  
(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty 
of the offence charged or claims to be tried.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In sub -section ( 2) of section 240  of the Principal Act, after the word “to the accused ” the following 
shall be added: — 
 “present  either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage in the presence of his 
pleader in the Court. ” 
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 13 of 2006, s.  5] 
241. Conviction on plea of guilty .—If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea and may, 
in his discretion, convict him thereon.  
242. Evidence for prosecution .—(1) If the accused refuses to plea d or does not plead, or claims to be tried or 
the Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 241, the Magistrate shall fix a date for the examination of 
witnesses : 
1[Provided that the Magistrate shall supply in advance to the accused, the statem ent of witnesses recorded 
during investigation by the police.]  
 (2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses 
directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.  
(3) On the date so fi xed, the Magistrate shall proceed to take all such evidence as may be produced in support of 
the prosecution:  
Provided that the Magistrate may permit the cross -examination of any witness to be deferred until any other 
witness or witnesses have been examine d or recall any witness for further cross -examination.  
243. Evidence for defence .—(1) The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce 
his evidence; and if the accused puts in any written statement, the Magistrate shall file it w ith the record.  
(2) If the accused, after he has entered upon his defence, applies to the Magistrate to issue any process for 
compelling the attendance of any witness for the purpose of examination or cross -examination, or the production of 
any document or  other thing, the Magistrate shall issue such process unless he considers that such application should 
be refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice and 
such ground shall be recorded by h im in writing:  
Provided that, when the accused has cross -examined or had the opportunity of cross -examining any witness 
before entering on his defence, the attendance of such witness shall not be compelled under this section, unless the 
Magistrate is satis fied that it is necessary for the ends of justice.  
(3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on an application under sub -section ( 2), require that the 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.19 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  129 
 reasonable expenses incurred by the witness in attending for the purposes of the trial be depo sited in Court.  
B.—Cases instituted otherwise than on police report                      
244. Evidence for prosecution .—(1) When, i n any warrant -case instituted otherwise than on a police report, 
the accused appears or is brought before a Magistrate, the M agistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take 
all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution.  
(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses directing 
him to attend or t o produce any document or other thing.  
245. When accused shall be discharged .—(1) If, upon taking all the evidence referred to in section 244, the 
Magistrate considers, for reasons to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out which, i f 
unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate shall discharge him.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a Magistrate from discharging the accused at any 
previous stage of the case if, for reasons to be recorded by such Magist rate, he considers the charge to be groundless.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
West Bengal  
In section  245 of the principal Act, after  sub-section ( 2), the following  sub-section shall be inserted : — 
“(3) If all the evidence referred to in section 244 are not produced in support of the  prosecution 
within four years from the date of appearance of the accused, the Magistrate  shall discharge the accused 
unless the prosecution satisfies the Magistrate that upon the evidence already produced and for special 
reasons there is gro und for presuming that it  shall not be in the interest of justice to discharge the 
accused. ”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 1988, s. 5.]  
246. Procedure where accused is not discharged .—(1) If, when such evidence has been taken, or at any 
previous stage of th e case, the Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has 
committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his 
opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall  frame in writing a charge against the accused.  
(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty 
or has any defence to make.  
(3) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the ple a, and may, in his discretion, convict him 
thereon.  
(4) If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead or claims to be tried or if the accused is not convicted 
under sub -section (3), he shall be required to state, at the commencement of the next hearin g of the case, or, if the 
Magistrate for reasons to be recorded in writing so thinks fit, forthwith, whether he wishes to cross -examine any, 
and, if so, which, of the witnesses for the prosecution whose evidence has been taken.  
(5) If he says he does so wi sh, the witnesses named by him shall be recalled and, after cross -examination and   
re-examination (if any), they shall be discharged.  
(6) The evidence of any remaining witnesses for the prosecution shall next be taken, and after                                     
cross -examination and re -examination (if any), they shall also be discharged.  
247. Evidence for defence .—The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce his 
evidence; and the provisions of section 243 shall apply to th e case.  130 
 C.—Conclusion of trial  
248. Acquittal or conviction .—(1) If, in any case under this Chapter in which a charge has been framed, the 
Magistrate finds the accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal.  
(2) Where, in any case under this Ch apter, the Magistrate finds the accused guilty, but does not proceed in 
accordance with the provisions of section 325 or section 360, he shall, after hearing the accused on the question of 
sentence, pass sentence upon him according to law.  
(3) Where, in an y case under this Chapter, a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of                 
sub-section (7) of section 211 and the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as alleged in the 
charge, the Magistrate may, after he h as convicted the said accused, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous 
conviction, and shall record a finding thereon:  
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Magistrate nor shall the accused be asked to plead thereto 
nor shall the p revious conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until 
the accused has been convicted under sub -section (2). 
249. Absence of complainant .—When the proceedings have been instituted upon complaint, and on any day 
fixed for the hearing of the case, the complainant is absent, and the offence may be lawfully compounded or is not a 
cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in his discretion, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, at any 
time before the char ge has been framed, discharge the accused.  
250. Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause .—(1) If, in any case instituted upon complaint 
or upon information given to a police officer or to a Magistrate, one or more persons is or are accused befo re a 
Magistrate of any offence triable by a Magistrate, and the Magistrate by whom the case is heard discharges or 
acquits all or any of the accused, and is of opinion that there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation 
against them or any of the m, the Magistrate may, by his order of discharge or acquittal, if the person upon whose 
complaint or information the accusation was made is present, call upon him forthwith to show cause why he should 
not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused when there are more than one; or, if such 
person is not present, direct the issue of a summons to him to appear and show cause as aforesaid.  
(2) The Magistrate shall record and consider any cause which such complainant or informant may show , and if 
he is satisfied that there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation, may, for reasons to be recorded , make 
an order that compensation to such amount, not exceeding the amount of fine he is empowered to impose, as he may 
determine, be pai d by such complainant or informant to the accused or to each or any of them.  
(3) The Magistrate may, by the order directing payment of the compensation under sub -section (2), further order 
that, in default of payment, the person ordered to pay such compens ation shall undergo simple imprisonment for a 
period not exceeding thirty days.  
(4) When any person is imprisoned under sub -section ( 3), the provisions of sections 68 and 69 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall, so far as may be, apply.  
(5) No perso n who has been directed to pay compensation under this section shall, by reason of such order, be 
exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the complaint made or information given by him:  
Provided that any amount paid to an accused person  under this section shall be taken into account in awarding 
compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter.  
(6) A complainant or informant who has been ordered under sub -section (2) by a Magistrate of the second class 
to pay compensation exceeding one hundred rupees, may appeal from the order, as if such complainant or informant 
had been convicted on a trial held by such Magistrate.  
(7) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made in a case whi ch is subject to 
appeal under sub -section (6), the compensation shall not be paid to him before the period allowed for the 
presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, before the appeal has been decided; and where 131 
 such order is ma de in a case which is not so subject to appeal the compensation shall not be paid before the 
expiration of one month from the date of the order.  
(8) The provisions of this section apply to summons -cases as well as to warrant -cases.  
CHAPTER XX  
TRIAL OF SUMM ONS -CASES BY MAGISTRATES  
251. Substance of accusation to be stated .—When in a summons -case the accused appears or is brought 
before the Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is accused shall be stated to him, and he shall be 
asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall not be necessary to frame a formal charge.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In Section 251 of the Principal Act, after the word “bought before the Magistrate ” the following shall be 
added  :— 
“Or appears  through the medium of electronic video linkage in the presence of his pleader in the Court ”. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 13 of 2006, s. 6]  
252. Conviction on plea of guilty .—If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly 
as possib le in the words used by the accused and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon.  
253. Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty cases .—(1) Where a summons has been 
issued under section 206 and the accused desires to plead guilty to th e charge without appearing before the 
Magistrate, he shall transmit to the Magistrate, by post or by messenger, a letter containing his plea and also the 
amount of fine specified in the summons.  
(2) The Magistrate may, in his discretion, convict the accuse d in his absence, on his plea of guilty and sentence 
him to pay the fine specified in the summons, and the amount transmitted by the accused shall be adjusted towards 
that fine, or where a pleader authorised by the accused in this behalf pleads guilty on b ehalf of the accused, the 
Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the pleader and may, in his discretion, 
convict the accused on such plea and sentence him as aforesaid.  
254. Procedure when not convicted .—(1) If the Magi strate does not convict the accused under section 252 or 
section 253, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in 
support of the prosecution, and also to hear the accused and take all such evidence as he produces in his defence.  
(2) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, issue a summons 
to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.  
(3) The Magistrate may, before summonin g any witness o n such application , require that the reasonable 
expenses of the witness incurred in attending for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court.  
255. Acquittal or conviction .—(1) If the Magistrate, upon taking the evidence referred  to in section 254 and 
such further evidence, if any, as he may, of his own motion, cause to be produced, finds the accused not guilty, he 
shall record an order of acquittal.  
(2) Where the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of se ction 325 or section 360, he 
shall, if he finds the accused guilty, pass sentence upon him according to law.  
(3) A Magistrate may, under section 252 or section 255, convict the accused of any offence triable under this 
Chapter, which from the facts admitte d or proved he appears to have committed, whatever may be the nature of the 132 
 complaint or summons, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the accused would not be prejudiced thereby.  
256. Non -appearance or death of complainant .—(1) If the summons has been issu ed on complaint, and on 
the day appointed for the appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the hearing may be 
adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, 
acquit  the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day:  
Provided that where the complainant is represented by a pleader or by the officer conducting the prosecution or 
where the Magistrate is of opinio n that the personal attendance of the complainant is not necessary, the Magistrate 
may, dispense with his attendance and proceed with the case.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall, so far as may be, apply also to cases where the non -appearance of 
the complainant is due to his death.  
257. Withdrawal of complaint .—If a complainant, at any time before a final order is passed in any case under 
this Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to withdraw his com plaint 
against the accused, or if there be more than one accused, against all  or any of them, the Magistrate may permit him 
to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn.  
258. Power to stop proceedi ngs in certain cases .—In any summons -case instituted otherwise than upon 
complaint, a Magistrate of the first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other 
Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop  the proceedings at any stage without pronouncing 
any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been 
recorded, pronounce a judgment of acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, an d such release shall have 
the effect of discharge.  
259. Power of Court to convert summons -cases into warrant -cases .—When in the course of the trial of a 
summons -case relating to an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, it ap pears to 
the Magistrate that in the interests of justice, the offence should be tried in accordance with the procedure for the 
trial of warrant -cases, such Magistrate may proceed to re -hear the case in the manner provided by this Code for the 
trial of warr ant-cases and may re -call any witness who may have been examined.  
CHAPTER XXI  
SUMMARY TRIALS  
260. Power to try summarily .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code — 
(a) any Chief Judicial Magistrate;  
(b) any Metropolitan Magistrate;  
(c) any Magis trate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by the High Court,  
may, if he thinks fit, try in a summary way all or any of the following offences: — 
(i) offences not punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term excee ding two 
years;  
(ii) theft, under section 379, section 380 or section 381 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where the 
value of the property stolen does not exceed 1[two thousand  rupees ]; 
(iii) receiving or retaining stolen property, under section 411 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where 
the value of the property does not exceed 1[two thousand  rupees ]; 
(iv) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, under section 414 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860), where the value of suc h property does not exceed 1[two thousand rupees] ; 
(v) offences under sections 454 and 456 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 23, for “two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  133 
  (vi) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 504, and 1[criminal intimidation  
punishable  with impr isionment  for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both ], under 
section 506 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(vii) abetment of any of the foregoing offences;  
(viii) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such attempt is an offence;  
(ix) any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the 
Cattle -trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).  
(2) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the Magistrate that the nature  of the case is such that it 
is undesirable to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall recall any witnesses who may have been examined and 
proceed to re -hear the case in the manner provided by this Code.  
261. Summary trial by Magistrate of the second class .—The High Court may confer on any Magistrate 
invested with the powers of a Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily any offence which is 
punishable only with fine or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months with or without fine, a nd any 
abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence.  
262. Procedure for summary trials .—(1) In trials under this Chapter, the procedure specified in this Code for 
the trial of summons -case shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned.  
(2) No sent ence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three months shall be passed in the case of any 
conviction under this Chapter.  
263. Record in summary trials .—In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate shall enter, in such form as the 
State Government may dire ct, the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the serial number of the case;  
(b) the date of the commission of the offence;  
(c) the date of the report or complaint;  
(d) the name of the complainant (if any);  
(e) the name, parentage and residence of the accuse d; 
(f) the offence complained of and the offence (if any) proved, and in cases coming under clause (ii),                 
clause (iii) or clause (iv) of sub -section (1) of section 260, the value of the property in respect of which the 
offence has been commi tted; 
(g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);  
(h) the finding;  
(i) the sentence or other final order;  
(j) the date on which proceedings terminated.  
264. Judgment in cases tried summarily .—In every case tried summarily in which the accused  does not plead 
guilty, the Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing a brief statement of the 
reasons for the finding.  
265. Language of record and judgment .—(1) Every such record and judgment shall be written in the 
language of the Court.  
(2) The High Court may authorise any Magistrate empowered to try offences summarily to prepare the aforesaid 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005 , s. 23, for “criminal intimidation” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  134 
 record or judgment or both by means of an officer appointed in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and the 
record o r judgment so prepared shall be signed by such Magistrate.  
1[CHAPTER XXIA  
PLEA BARGAINING  
265A. Application of the Chapter .—(1) This Chapter shall apply in respect of an accused against whom — 
(a) the report has been forwarded by the officer in charge of th e police station under section 173 alleging 
therein that an offence appears to have been committed by him other than an offence for which the punishment 
of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years has been provi ded 
under the law for the time being in force; or  
(b) a Magistrate has taken cognizance of an offence on complaint, other than an offence for which the 
punishment of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years, has  been 
provided under the law for the time being in force, and after examining complainant and witnesses under 
section 200, issued the process under section 204,  
but does not apply where such offence affects the socio -economic condition of the country or ha s been committed 
against a woman, or a child below the age of fourteen years.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall, by notification, determine the offences 
under the law for the time being in force which shall be the offenc es affecting the socio -economic condition of the 
country.  
265B. Application for plea bargaining .—(1) A person accused of an offence may file an application for plea 
bargaining in the Court in which such offence is pending for trial.  
(2) The application und er sub -section ( 1) shall contain a brief description of the case relating to which the 
application is filed including the offence to which the case relates and shall be accompanied by an affidavit sworn by 
the accused stating therein that he has voluntaril y preferred, after understanding the nature and extent of punishment 
provided under the law for the offence, the plea bargaining in his case and that he has not previously been convicted 
by a Court in a case in which he had been charged with the same offen ce. 
(3) After receiving the application under sub -section ( 1), the Court shall issue notice to the Public Prosecutor or 
the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and to the accused to appear on the date fixed for the case.  
(4) When the Public Prosec utor or the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and the accused appear on 
the date fixed under sub -section ( 3), the Court shall examine the accused in camera , where the other party in the 
case shall not be present, to satisfy itself that the accus ed has filed the application voluntarily and where — 
(a) the Court is satisfied that the application has been filed by the accused voluntarily, it shall provide time 
to the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and the accuse d to work out a 
mutually satisfactory disposition of the case which may include giving to the victim by the accused the 
compensation and other expenses during the case and thereafter fix the date for further hearing of the case;  
(b) the Court finds that th e application has been filed involuntarily by the accused or he has previously been 
convicted by a Court in a case in which he had been charged with the same offence, it shall proceed further in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code from the stage su ch application has been filed under                   
sub-section ( 1). 
265C. Guidelines for mutually satisfactory disposition .—In working out a mutually satisfactory disposition 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) of section 265B, the Court shall follow th e following procedure, namely: — 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 4 (w.e.f. 5 -7-2006).  135 
 (a) in a case instituted on a police report, the Court shall issue notice to the Public Prosecutor, the police 
officer who has investigated the case, the accused and the victim of the case to participate in the meeting to 
work out a satisfactory disposition of the case:  
Provided that throughout such process of working out a satisfactory disposition of the case, it shall be the 
duty of the Court to ensure that the entire process is completed voluntarily by the parties particip ating in the 
meeting:  
Provided further that the accused, if he so desires,  participate in such meeting with his pleader, if any, 
engaged in the case;  
(b) in a case instituted otherwise than on police report, the Court shall issue notice to the accused and the 
victim of the case to participate in a meeting to work out a satisfactory disposition of the case:  
Provided that it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure, throughout such process of working out a 
satisfactory disposition of the case, that it is comp leted voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting:  
Provided further that if the victim of the case or the accused, as the case may be, so desires, he may 
participate in such meeting with his pleader engaged in the case.  
265D. Report of the mutu ally satisfactory disposition to be submitted before the Court .—Where in a 
meeting under section 265C, a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out, the Court shall prepare                   
a report of such disposition which shall be signed b y the presiding officer of the Court and all other persons                     
who participated in the meeting and if no such disposition has been worked out, the Court shall record such 
observation and proceed further in accordance with the provisions of t his Code from the stage the application under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 265B has been filed in such case.  
265E. Disposal of the case .—Where a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out under                   
section 265D, the Court shall di spose of the case in the following manner, namely: — 
(a) the Court shall award the compensation to the victim in accordance with the disposition under                  
section 265D and hear the parties on the quantum of the punishment, releasing of the accu sed on probation of 
good conduct or after admonition under section 360 or for dealing with the accused under the provisions of the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) or any other law for the time being in force and follow the 
procedure specified  in the succeeding clauses for imposing the punishment on the accused;  
(b) after hearing the parties under clause ( a), if the Court is of the view that section 360 or the provisions of 
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) or any other law for the time being in force are attracted in 
the case of the accused, it may release the accused on probation or provide the benefit of any such law, as the 
case may be;  
(c) after hearing the parties under clause ( b), if the Court finds that minimum punishment  has been 
provided under the law for the offence committed by the accused, it may sentence the accused to half of such 
minimum punishment;  
(d) in case after hearing the parties under clause ( b), the Court finds that the offence committed by the 
accused is not covered under clause ( b) or clause ( c), then, it may sentence the accused to one -fourth of the 
punishment provided or extendable, as the case may be, for such offence.  
265F. Judgment of the Court .—The Court shall deliver its judgment in terms of sectio n 265E in the open 
Court and the same shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court.  
265G. Finality of the judgment .—The judgment delivered by the Court under section 265G shall be final and 
no appeal (except the special leave petition under articl e 136 and writ petition under articles 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution) shall lie in any Court against such judgment.  
265H. Power of the Court in plea bargaining .—A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its 136 
 functions under this Chapter, all the  powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters relating to 
the disposal of a case in such Court under this Code.  
265-I. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment .—
The provisions of section 428 shall apply, for setting off the period of detention undergone by the accused against 
the sentence of imprisonment imposed under this Chapter, in the same manner as they apply in respect of the 
imprisonment under other provisions of this Cod e. 
265J. Savings .—The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other provisions of this Code and nothing in such other provisions shall be construed to 
constrain the meaning of any provis ion of this Chapter.  
Explanation .—For the purposes o f this Chapter, the expression “Public Prosecutor ” has the meaning assigned to 
it under clause ( u) of section 2 and includes an Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under section 25.  
265K. Statements of accused not to be used .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, the statements or facts stated by an accused in an application for plea bargaining filed under                
section 265B shall not be used for any other pu rpose except for the purpose of this Chapter.  
265L. Non -application of the Chapter .—Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any juvenile or child as 
defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000  (56 o f 2000) .] 
CHAPTER XXII  
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS  
266. Definitions. —In this Chapter, — 
(a) “detained ” includes detained under any law providing for preventive detention;  
(b) “prison ” includes, — 
(i) any place which has been declare d by the State Government, by general or special order, to be a  
subsidiary jail;  
(ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or institution of a like nature.  
267. Power to require attendance of prisoners. —(1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry, trial or 
proceeding under this Code, it appears to a Criminal Court, — 
(a) that a person confined or detained in a prison should be brought before the Court for answering to a 
charge of an offence, or for the purpose of any proceedings against him, or  
(b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine such person as a witness,  
the Court may make an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce such person before the Court 
answering to the charge or  for the purpose of such proceeding or, as th e case may be, for giving evidence.  
(2) Where an order under sub -section (1) is made by a  Magistrate of the second class,  it shall not be forwarded 
to, or acted upon by, the officer in charge of the prison unless it is countersigned by the Chief Judicial M agistrate, to 
whom such Magistrate is subordinate.  
(3) Every order submitted for countersigning under sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied by a  statement of the 
facts which, in the opinion of the Magistrate, render the order necessary,  and the Chief Judici al Magistrate to whom 
it is submitted may,  after considering such statement, decline to countersign the order.  137 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Jharkhand  
Amendment of Section 267 .-In section 267 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in its application to 
the State of Jhark hand, in Sub -Section (1) Clause (b): - (i) After the words “the court may make an order 
requiring the officer -in-charge of the prison to produce such person before the Court” the words “either in 
prison or through the medium of electronic video linkage” sha ll be inserted.  
[Vide Jharkhand Act 2 of 2016, s. 2]  
268. Power of State Government to exclude certain persons from operation of section 267. —(1) The State 
Government may, at any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub -section ( 2), by general o r special order,  
direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in which he or they may be confined 
or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains in force, no order made under section 267, whether before 
or after  the order of the State Government, shall have effect in respect of such person or class of persons.  
(2) Before making an order under sub -section (1), the State Government shall have regard to the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the nature of the offence f or which, or the grounds on which, the person or class of persons has been 
ordered to be confined or detained in prison;  
(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of persons is allowed to be 
removed from the prison;  
(c) the public interest, generally.  
269. Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order in certain contingencies. —Where the 
person in respect of whom an order is made under section 267 — 
(a) is by reason of sickness or infirmity unfit to be remov ed from the prison; or  
(b) is under committal  for trial or under remand pending trial or pending a  preliminary investigation; or  
(c) is in custody for a  period which would expire before the expiration of the time required for complying 
with the order and f or taking him back to the prison in which he is confined or  detained; or  
(d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government under section 268 applies,  
the officer  in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court's order and shal l send to the Court a  
statement of reasons for so abstaining:  
Provided that where the attendance of such person  is required for giving evidence at a place not more than 
twenty -five kilometres distance from the prison, the officer in charge of the prison sh all not so abstain for the reason 
mentioned in clause (b). 
270. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody. —Subject to the provisions of section 269, the officer in 
charge of the prison shall, upon delivery of an order made under sub -section (1) of section  267 and duly 
countersigned , where necessary, under sub -section (2) thereof, cause the person named in  the order to be taken to 
the Court in which his attendance is required, so as to be present there at the time mentioned in the order, and shall 
cause hi m to be kept in custody in or near the Court until he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to 
be taken back to the prison in which he was confined or detained.  
271. Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison. —The provisio ns of this Chapter shall 
be without prejudice to the power of the Court to issue, under section 284, a commission for the examination, as a 
witness, of any person confined or detained in a prison; and the provisions of Part B of Chapter XXIII shall apply i n 138 
 relation to the examination on commission of any such person in the prison as they apply in relation to the 
examination on commission of any other person.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
A.—Mode of taking and recording evidence  
272. Langua ge of Courts. —The State Government may determine what shall be, for purposes of this Code, the 
language of each Court within the State other than the High Court.  
273. Evidence to be taken in presence of accused. —Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence 
taken in the course of the trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the accused, or, when his 
personal attendance is dispensed with,  in the presence of his pleader:  
1[Provided that where the evidence of a woman below the age of eighteen years who is alleged to have been 
subjected to rape or any other sexual offence, is to be recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure 
that such woman is not confronted by the accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cro ss-examination of 
the accused.]  
Explanation. —In this section, “accused ” includes a person in relation to whom any proceeding under                  
Chapter VIII has been commenced under this Code.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1 973 (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act ”), in section 273, after the 
words “in the presence of his pleader ”, the words “or, as the case may be, through the medium of Electronic Video 
Linkage when the court on its own motion or on an application so directs in the interests of justice ” shall be added.  
[Vide Gujarat  Act 31 of 2017, s. 2]  
Jharkhand  
Amendment of Section 273 .-In section 273 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to the 
State of Jharkhand: - 
(i) After the words “All evid ence taken in the course of the trial or other proceeding shall be taken 
in the presence of the accused,” the word “either in person or through the medium of electronic video 
linkage” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Jharkhand Act 2 of 2016, s. 3]  
274. Record in  summons -cases and inquiries. —(1) In all summons -cases tried before a Magistrate, in all 
inquiries under sections 145 to 148 (both inclusive), and in all proceedings under section 446 otherwise than in the 
course of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the exam ination of each witness proceeds, make a memorandum of the 
substance of the evidence in the language of the Court:  
Provided that if the Magistrate is unable to make such memorandum himself, he shall, after recording the reason 
of his inability, cause such memorandum to be made in writing or from his dictation in open Court.  
(2) Such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the record.  
275. Record in warrant -cases. —(1) In all warrant -cases tried before a  Magistrate, the evidence of  each witness 
shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the Magistrate himself or by his dictation in 
open Court or,  where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other incapacity, under his direction and 
superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed by him in this behalf : 
2[Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub -section may also be recorded by audio -video electronic 
                                                 
1. Proviso  ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 20 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 20 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  139 
 means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of the offence.]  
(2) Where the Magistrate causes the evidence to be taken down, he shall record a certificate that the evidence 
could not be taken down by himself for the reasons referred to in sub -section (1). 
(3) Such evidence shall ordinarily be  taken down in the form of a  narrat ive; but the Magistrate may, in his 
discretion take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer.  
(4) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the record.  
276. Reco rd in trial before Court of Session. —(1) In all trials before a Court of Session, the evidence of each 
witness shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the presiding Judge himself or by his 
dictation in open Court, or under hi s direction and superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed by him in 
this behalf.  
1[(2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative, but the presiding Judge may, in 
his discretion, take down, or cause to be taken down , any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer.]  
(3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the presiding Judge and shall form part of the record.  
277. Language of record of evidence. —In every case where evide nce is taken down under section  275 or 
276,— 
(a) if the witness gives evidence in the language of the Court, it shall be taken down in that language;  
(b)  if  he gives evidence in any other language, it may,  if  practicable, be taken down in that language, and 
if  it is not prac ticable to do so, a  true translation of  the evidence in the language of the Court  shall be  
prepared as  the examination of  the witness  proceeds, signed   by the Magistrate or  presiding Judge, and  shall  
form part of   the record;  
(c) where under cla use (b) evidence is taken down in a language other than the language of the Court, a true 
translation thereof in the language of the Court  shall be prepared as soon as practicable, signed by the 
Magistrate or presiding Judge, and shall form part of the re cord:  
Provided that when under clause (b) evidence is taken down in English and a translation thereof in the language 
of the Court is not required by any of the parties, the Court may  dispense with such translation.  
278. Procedure in regard to such evidenc e when completed. —(1) As the evidence of each witness taken 
under section 275 or section 276 is completed, it shall be read over to him in the presence of the accused, if in 
attendance, or of his pleader, if he appears by pleader, and shall, if necessary, be corrected.  
(2) If the witness denies the correctness of any part of the evidence when the same is read over to him, the 
Magistrate or presiding Judge may, instead of correcting the evidence, make a memorandum thereon of the 
objection made to it by the w itness and shall add such remarks as he thinks necessary.  
(3) If the record of the evidence is in a language different from that in which it has been given and the witness 
does not understand that language, the record shall be interpreted to him in the lan guage in which it was given, or in 
a language which he understands.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the principal Act, in section 278, after sub -section (3), the following sub -sections shall be added, namely: — 
“(4) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall apply when the evidence under section 273 is taken 
through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage.  
(5) The evidence taken through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage in electronic from shall be the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 20, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  140 
 electronic record within the meaning of clause (t ) of section 2 if the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 
2000) ” 
[Vide Gujarat  Act 31 of 2017, sec. 3.] 
279. Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader. —(1) Whenever any evidence is given in a language 
not understood by the accused, and he is  present in Court in person, it shall be interpreted to  him in open Court in a 
language understood by him.  
(2) If he appears by pleader and the evidence is given in a  language other than the language of the Court, and 
not understood by the pleader, it shal l be interpreted to such pleader in that language.  
 (3) When documents are put for the purpose of formal proof, it shall be in the discretion of the Court to 
interpret as much thereof as appears necessary.  
280. Remarks respecting demeanour of witness. —When  a presiding Judge or Magistrate has recorded the 
evidence of a witness, he shall also record such remarks (if any) as he thinks material respecting the demeanour of 
such witness whilst under examination.  
281. Record of examination of accused. —(1) Whenever  the accused is examined by a Metropolitan 
Magistrate, the Magistrate shall make a memorandum of the substance of the examination of the accused in the 
language of the Court and such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the 
record.  
(2) Whenever the accused is examined by any Magistrate other than a Metropolitan Magistrate, or by a 
Court of Session, the whole of such examination, including  every question  put  to  him and every answer  
given by  him, shall be recorded  in full  by the   presiding Judge or Magistrate   himself or  where  he is unable 
to do so owing to a physical or other  incapacity, under   his  direction and superintendence by an officer of the 
Court appointed by him in this behalf.  
(3) The record shall, if pra cticable, be in the language in which the accused is examined or, if that is not 
practicable, in the language of the Court.  
(4) The record shall be shown or read to the accused, or, if he does not understand the language in which it 
is written, shall be in terpreted to him in a language which he understands, and he shall be at liberty to explain 
or add to his answers.  
 (5) It shall thereafter be signed by the accused and by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, who shall certify 
under his own hand that the exam ination was taken in his presence and hearing and that the record contains a 
full and true account of the statement made by the accused.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the examination of an accused person in the course 
of a summary  trial. 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the principal Act, in section 281, in sub -section (6), after the words “the examination of an accused 
person ”, the words “either through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage or ” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Gujarat  Act 31 o f 2017, s. 4]  
282. Interpreter to be bound to interpret truthfully. —When the services of an interpreter are required 
by any Criminal Court for the interpretation of any evidence or statement, he shall be bound to state the true 
interpretation of such evide nce or statement.  
283. Record in High Court. —Every High Court may, by general rule, prescribe the manner in which the 
evidence of witnesses and the examination of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming before it, and 141 
 such evidence and examination shall be taken down in accordance with such rule . 
B.—Commissions for the examination of witnesses  
284. When attendance of witness may be dispensed with and commission issued. —(1) Whenever, in 
the course of any  inquiry, trial or other  proceeding under thi s Code, it appears to a Court or Magistrate that 
the examination of a witness  is  necessary  for the ends of  justice, and  that the attendance of  such  witness  
cannot  be  procured  without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of 
the case, would be unreasonable, the Court or Magistrate may dispense with such attendance and may issue a 
commission for the examination of the witness in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter:  
Provided that where the examination  of the President or the Vice -President of India or the Governor of a 
State or the Administrator of a Union territory as a witness is necessary for the ends of Justice, a commission 
shall be issued for the examination of such a witness.  
(2) The Court may, when issuing a commission for  the examination of a witness for the prosecution, 
direct that such amount as the Court considers reasonable to meet the expenses of the accused, including the 
pleader's fees, be paid by the prosecution.  
285. Commission to who m to be issued. —(1) If the witness is within the territories to which this Code 
extends, the commission shall be directed to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, as the case may be, within whose local jurisdiction the witness  is to be found.  
(2) If the witness is in India, but in a State or an area  to which this Code does not extend, the commission shall 
be directed to such Court or officer as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  
(3) If the witn ess is in a country or place outside India and arrangements have been made by the Central 
Government with the Government of such country or place for taking the evidence of witnesses in relation to 
criminal matters, the commission shall be issued in such f orm, directed to such Court or officer,  and sent to such 
authority for transmission as  the Central Government may, by notification, prescribe in this behalf.  
286. Execution of commissions. —Upon receipt of the commission, the  Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, or 
Chief Judicial Magistrate or such Metropolitan or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, shall summon 
the witness before him or proceed to the place where the witness is, and shall take down his evidence in the same 
manner, and may for th is purpose exercise the same powers, as in trials or warrant -cases under this Code.  
287. Parties may examine  witnesses. —(1) The parties to any proceeding under this Code in which a 
commission is issued may respectively forward any interrogatories in writin g which the Court or Magistrate 
directing the commission may think relevant to the issue, and it shall be lawful for the Magistrate, Court or officer to 
whom the commission, is directed, or to whom the duty of executing it is delegated, to examine the witn ess upon 
such interrogatories.  
(2) Any such party may appear before such magistrate, Court or Officer by pleader, or if not in custody, in 
person, and may examine, cross -examine and re -examine (as the case may be) the said witness.  
288. Return of commissio n.—(1) After any commission issued under section 284 has been duly executed, it 
shall be returned, together with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the Court or Magistrate issuing 
the commission; and the commission, the return thereto an d the deposition shall be open at all reasonable times to 
inspection of the parties, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either party, and 
shall form part of the record.  
(2) Any deposition so taken, if it satisfies t he conditions prescribed by section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872), may also be received in evidence at any subsequent stage of the case before another Court.  
289. Adjournment of proceeding. —In every case in which a commission is issued un der section 284, the 142 
 inquiry, trial or other proceeding may be adjourned for a specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and 
return of the commission.  
290. Execution of foreign commissions. —(1) The provisions of section 286 and so much of sect ion 287 and 
section 288 as relate to the execution of a commission and its return shall apply in respect of commissions issued by 
any of the Courts, Judges or Magistrates hereinafter mentioned as they apply to commissions issued under section 
284. 
(2) The Courts, Judges and Magistrates referred to in sub -section (1) are— 
(a) any such Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction within an area in India to which this Code 
does not extend, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this b ehalf;  
(b) any Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in any such country or place outside India, as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, and having authority, under the law in force in 
that country or place, to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses in relation to criminal matters.  
291. Deposition of medical witness. —(1) The deposition of civil surgeon or other medical witness, taken and 
attested by a Magistrate in the presence of the accused, or take n on commission under this Chapter, may be given in 
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, although the deponent is not called as a witness.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and 
examine any such deponent as to the subject -matter of his deposition.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the principal Act, in section 291, in sub -section ( 1), after the words “in the presence of accused ”, the words 
“or, as the case may be through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage ” shall be inserted.  
  [Vide Gujarat  Act 31 of 2017, s. 5]  
1[291A. Identification report of Magistrate .—(1) Any document purporting to be a report of identification 
under the hand of an Executive Magistrate in respect of a person or property may be used as evidence in any inquiry, 
trial or other proceeding under this Code, although such Magistrate is not called as a witness:  
Provided that where such report contains a statement of any suspect or witness to whi ch the provisions of 
section 21, section 32, section 33, section 155 or section 157, as the case may be, of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
(1 of 1872), apply, such statement shall not be used under this sub -section except in accordance with the provisions 
of those sections.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or of the accused, summon 
and examine su ch Magistrate as to the subject -matter of the said report.]  
292. Evidence of officers of the Mint. —(1) Any docum ent purporting to be a report under the hand of any 
such 2[officer of any Mint or of any Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press (including the officer of 
the Controller of Stamps and Stationery) or of any Fore nsic Department or Division of F orensic Science Laboratory 
or any Government Examiner of Questioned Documents or any State Examiner of Questioned Documents, as the 
case may be,]  as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, upon any matter or thing duly 
submitte d to him for examination and report in the course of any proceeding under this Code, may be used as 
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, although such officer is not called as a witness.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, s ummon and examine any such officer as to the subject -matter of his report:  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 24 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 5, for certain words (w. e.f. 16 -4-2006).  143 
 Provided that no such officer shall be summoned to produce any records on which the report is based.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Ev idence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), no 
such officer shall,  1[except with the permission of the General Manager or any officer in charge of any Mint or of any 
Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press or of any Forensic Department or any officer in c harge of the 
Forensic Science Laboratory or of the Government Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation or of the State 
Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation, as the case may be,]  be permitted — 
(a) to give any evidence derived from any unpublis hed official records on which the report is based; or  
(b) to disclose the nature or particulars of any test applied by him in the course of the examination of the 
matter or thing.  
293. Reports of certain Government scientific experts. —(1) Any document purp orting to be a report under 
the hand of a Government scientific expert to whom this section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to 
him for examination or analysis and report in the course of any proceeding under this Code, may be used as 
evide nce in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such expert as to the subject -matter of his report.  
(3) Where any such expert is summoned by a Court, and he is unable to attend pers onally, he may, unless the 
Court has expressly directed him to appear personally, depute any responsible officer working with him to attend the 
Court, if such officer is conversant with the facts of the case and can satisfactorily depose in Court on his be half. 
(4) This section applies to the following Government scientific experts, namely: — 
(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government;  
2[(b) the Chief Controller  of Explosives; ] 
(c) the Director of the Finger Print Bureau;  
(d) the Director,  Haffkeine Institute, Bombay;  
(e) the Director 3[, Deputy Director or Assistant Director] of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a 
State Forensic Science Laboratory;  
(f) the S erologist to the Government;  
4[(g) any other Government scientific  expert specified, by notification, by the Central Government for this 
purpose.]  
294. No formal proof of certain documents. —(1) Where any document is filed before any Court by the 
prosecution or the accused, the particulars of every such document shall be included in a list and the prosecution or 
the accused, as the case may be, or the pleader for the prosecution or the accused, if any, shall be called upon to 
admit or deny the genuineness of each such document.  
(2) The list of documents shall be in such fo rm as be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) Where the genuineness of any document is not disputed, such document may be read  in evidence in inquiry, 
trial or other proceeding under this Code without proof of the signature of the person t o whom it purp orts to be 
signed : 
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require such signature to be proved.  
295. Affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants. —When any application is made to any Court in the 
                                                 
1. Subs . by Act 2 of 2006, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 26, for cl. ( b) (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 21 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
4. Added by Act 25 of 2005, s. 26 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  144 
 course of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding  under this Code, and allegations are made therein respecting any 
public servant, the applicant may give evidence of the facts alleged in the application by affidavit, and the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, order that evidence relating to such facts be  so given. 
296. Evidence of formal character on affidavit. —(1) The evidence of any person whose evidence is of a 
formal character may be given by affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding und er this Code.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and 
examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.  
297. Authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn. —(1) Affidavits to be used before any Court under 
this Code may be sworn or affirmed before — 
1[(a) any Judge or Judicial or Executive Magistrate, or]  
(b) any Commissioner of Oaths appointed by a High Court or Court of Session, or  
(c) any notary appointed under the  Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952).  
(2) Affidavits shall be confined to, and shall state separately, such facts as the deponent is able to prove from his 
own knowledge and such facts as he has reasonable ground to believe to be true, and in the latter case, the deponent 
shall clearly state the grounds of such belief.  
(3) The Court may order any scandalous and irrelevant matter in the affidavit to be struck out or amended.  
298. Previous conviction or acquittal how proved. —In any inquiry, trial or other proceed ing under this Code, 
a previous conviction or acquittal may be proved, in addition to any other mode provided by any law for the time 
being  in force, — 
(a) by an extract certified under the hand of the officer having the custody of the records of the Court  in 
which such conviction or acquittal was held, to be a copy of the sentence or order,  or  
(b) in case of a conviction, either by a certificate signed by the officer in charge of the Jail in which the 
punishment or any part thereof was undergone, or by pr oduction of the warrant of commitment under which the 
punishment was suffered,  
together with, in each of such cases, evidence as to the identity of the accused person with the person so convicted or 
acquitted.  
299. Record of evidence in absence of accused .—(1) If it is proved that an accused person has absconded, and 
that there is no immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court competent to try 2[, or commit for trial ,] such person 
for the offence complained of may, in his absence, examine the witnesses (if any) produced on behalf of the 
prosecution, and record their depositions and any such deposition may, on the arrest of such person, be given in 
evidence against him on the inquiry into, or trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if the deponen t is dead or 
incapable of giving evidence or cannot be found or his presence cannot be procured without an amount of delay, 
expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable.  
(2) If it appears that an offence punish able with death or imprisonment for life has been committed by some 
person or persons unknown, the High Court or the Sessions Judge may direct that any Magistrate of the first class 
shall hold an inquiry and examine any witnesses who can give evidence conc erning the offence and any depositions 
so taken may be given in evidence against any person who is subsequently accused of the offence, if the deponent is 
dead or incapable of giving evidence or beyond the limits of India.  
 
 
                                                 
1. Subs.  by Act 45 of 1978, s. 22,  for cl. ( a)  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 23  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  145 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 299 of the said Code, in sub -section ( 1), for the words “competent  to try such person”, the 
words “competent to try such person or to commit him for trial” shall be substituted.  
  [Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 7]  
CHAPTER XXIV  
GENERAL PR OVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
300. Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same offence .—(1) A person who has once been 
tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall, while s uch 
conviction or acquittal remains in force, not be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the same facts for 
any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against him might have been made under                  
sub-section (1) of section 221, or for which he might have been convicted under sub -section (2) thereof.  
(2) A person acquitted or  convicted of any offence may be afterwards tried, with the consent of the State 
Government, for any distinct offence for which a separ ate charge might have  been made against him at the former 
trial under sub -section (1) of section 220.  
(3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act causing consequences which, together with such 
act, constituted a different offence from that  of which he was  convicted, may be afterwards tried for such last 
mentioned offence, if the consequences had not happened, or were not known to the Court to have happened, at the 
time when he was convicted.  
(4) A person acquitted convicted of any offence c onstituted by any acts may, notwithstanding such acquittal or 
conviction, be subsequently charged with, and tried for, any other offence constituted by the same acts which he 
may have committed if the Court by which he was first tried was not competent to try the offence with which he is 
subsequently charged.  
(5) A person discharged under section 258 shall not be tried again for the same offence except with the consent 
of the Court by which he was discharged or of any other Court to which the first -mentione d Court is subordinate.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 26 of the General Clauses                                                
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) or of section 188 of this Code.  
Explanation. —The dismissal of a compl aint, or the discharge of the accused, is not an acquittal for the purposes 
of this section.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is tried upon a charge of theft as a servant and aquitted.  He cannot afterwards, while the acquittal remains in 
force, be charged with theft as a servant, or, upon the same facts, with theft simply, or with criminal breach of trust.  
(b) A is tried for causing grievous hurt and convicted.  The person injured afterwards dies.  A may be tried again for 
culpable homicide.  
(c) A is charged before th e Court of Session and convicted of the culpable homicide of B.  A may not afterwards be 
tried on the same facts for the murder of B.  
(d) A is charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of, voluntarily causing hurt to B.  A may 
not afterwards be tried for voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B on the same facts, unless the case comes within                       
sub-section (3) of this section.  
(e) A is charged by a Magistrate of the second class with, and convicted by him of, the ft of property from the person of 
B. A  may subsequently be charged with, and tried for, robbery on the same facts.   
(f) A, B and C are charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of, robbing D.  A, B and C may 
afterwards be char ged with, and tried for, dacoity on the same facts.  
 146 
 301. Appearance by Public Prosecutors .—(1) The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in  charge 
of a case may appear and plead without any written authority before any Court in which that case is under inquiry, 
trial or appeal.  
(2) If in any such case any private person instructs a pleader to prosecute any person in any Court, the Public 
Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of the case shall conduct the prosecution, and the pleade r so 
instructed shall act therein under the directions of the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, and may, 
with the permission of the Court, submit written arguments after the evidence is closed in the case.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
West Bengal  
For su b-section ( 1) of section 301 of the principal Act, the following sub -sections shall be 
substituted: — 
“(1) (a) The Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may appear and plead without any written authority 
before any Court in which that case is under inquiry,  trial or appeal.  
(b) The Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may appear and plead without any written authority 
before any Court in which that case is under inquiry or trial. ”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 26 of 1990, s. 4]  
302. Permission to conduct  prosecution .—(1) Any Magistrate inquiring into or trying a case may permit the 
prosecution to be conducted by any person other than a police officer below the rank of inspector; but no person, 
other than the Advocate -General or Government Advocate or a Pu blic Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, 
shall be entitled to do so without such permission:  
Provided that no police officer shall be permitted to conduct the prosecution if he has taken part in the 
investigation into the offence with respect to whi ch the accused is being prosecuted.  
(2) Any person conducting the prosecution may do so personally or by a pleader.  
303. Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to be defended .—Any person accused of an 
offence before a Criminal Court, or ag ainst whom proceedings are instituted under this Code, may of right be 
defended by a pleader of his choice.  
304. Legal aid to accused at State expense in  certain cases .—(1) Where, in a trial before the Court of Session, 
the accused is not represented by a pleader, and where it appears to the Court that the accused has not sufficient 
means to engage a pleader, the Court shall assign a pleader for his defence at the expense of the State.  
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Governme nt, make rules providing for — 
(a) the mode of selecting pleaders for defence under sub -section ( 1); 
(b) the facilities to be allowed to such pleaders by the Courts;  
(c) the fees payable to such pleaders by the Government, and generally, for carrying out th e purposes of 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that, as from such date as may be specified in the 
notification, the provisions of sub -sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to any class of trials before other Cou rts 
in the State as they apply in relation to trials before Courts of  Session.  
305. Procedure when corporation or registered society is an accused .—(1) In this section, “corporation ” 
means an incorporated company or other body corporate, and includes a so ciety registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860).  147 
 (2) Where a corporation is the accused person or one of the accused persons in an inquiry or trial, it may appoint 
a representative for the purpose of the inquiry or trial and such a ppointment need not be under the seal of the 
corporation.  
(3) Where a representative of a corporation appears, any requirement of this Code that anything shall be done in 
the presence of the accused or shall be read or stated or explained to the accused, shall be construed as a requirement 
that thing shall be done in the presence of the representative or read or stated or explained to the representative, and 
any requirement that the accused shall be examined shall be construed as a requirement that the rep resentative shall 
be examined.  
(4) Where a representative of a corporation does not appear, any such requirement as is referred to in                     
sub-section (3) shall not apply.  
(5) Where a statement in writing purporting to be signed by the manag ing director of the corporation or by any 
person (by whatever name called) having, or being one of the persons having the management of the affairs of the 
corporation to the effect that the person named in the statement has been appointed as the representa tive of the 
corporation for the purposes of this section, is filed, the Court shall, unless the contrary is proved, presume that such 
person has been so appointed.  
(6) If a question arises as to whether any person, appearing as the representative of a corp oration in an inquiry 
or trial before a Court is or is not such representative, the question shall be determined by the Court.  
306. Tender of pardon to accomplice .—(1) With a  view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to 
have been directly or in directly concerned in or privy to an offence to which this section applies, the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate at  any stage of the investigation or inquiry into, or the trial of, the offence, 
and the Magistrate of the first class in quiring into or trying the offence, at any stage of the inquiry or trial, may 
tender a pardon to such person on condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the whole of the 
circumstances within his knowledge relative to the offence and to every o ther person concerned, whether as 
princip al or abettor, in the commission thereof.  
(2) This section applies to — 
(a) any offence triable exclusively by the Court of Session or by the Court of a Special Judge appointed 
under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1 952 (46 of 1952);  
(b) any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years or with a more severe 
sentence.  
(3) Every Magistrate who tenders a pardon under sub -section (1) shall record — 
(a) his reasons for so doing;  
(b) whether the tend er was or was not accepted by the person to whom it was made,  
and shall, on application made by the accused, furnish him with a copy of such record free of cost.  
(4) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made under sub -section (1)— 
(a) shall be examine d as a witness in the Court of the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence and in 
the subsequent trial, if any;  
(b) shall, unless he is already on bail, be detained in custody until the termination of the trial.  
(5) Where a person has accepted a tender  of pardon made under sub -section ( 1) and has been examined under 148 
 sub-section (4), the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence shall, without making any further inquiry in the 
case— 
(a) commit it for trial — 
(i) to the Court of Session if the offence is  triable exclusively by that Court or if the Magistrate taking 
cognizance is the Chief Judicial Magistrate;  
(ii) to a Court of Special Judge appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952), 
if the offence is triable exclusively by that Co urt; 
(b) in any other case, make over the case to the Chief Judicial Magistrate who shall try the case himself.  
307. Power to direct tender of pardon .—At any time after commitment of a case but before judgment is 
passed, the Court to which the commitment i s made may, with a view to obtaining at the trial the evidence of any 
person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, any such offence, tender a pardon on 
the same condition to such person.  
308. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon .—(1) Where, in regard to a person who has 
accepted a tender of pardon made under section 306 or section 307, the Public Prosecutor certifies that in his opinion 
such person has, either by wilfully concealing anything essential or by giving false evidence, not complied with the 
condition on which the tender was made, such person may be tried for the offence in respect of which the pardon 
was so tendered or for any other offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection w ith the same 
matter, and also for the offence of giving false evidence:  
Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any of the other accused:  
Provided further that such person shall not be tried for the offence of giving false evidence except  with the 
sanction of the High Court, and nothing contained in section 195 or section 340 shall apply to that offence.  
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of pardon and recorded by a Magistrate under 
section 164 or by a Court under s ub-section (4) of section 306 may  be given in evidence against him at such trial.  
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he has complied with the condition upon which such 
tender was made; in which case it shall be for the prosecuti on to prove that the condition has not been complied 
with.  
(4) At such trial, the Court shall — 
(a) if it is a Court of Session, before the charge is read out and explained to the accused;  
(b) if it is the Court of a Magistrate, before the evidence of the w itnesses for the prosecution is taken,  
ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied with the conditions on which the tender of pardon was 
made.                    
(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the trial and it shall, before 
passing judgment in the case, find whether or not  the  accused  has  complied  with  the conditions of the           
pardon, and,  if it finds  that he has so complied, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Cod e, pass 
judgment of acquittal.  
309. Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings .—1[(1) In every inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 21, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  149 
 continued from day -to-day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the 
adjournmen t of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded : 
Provided that w hen the inquiry or trial relates  to an offence under section 376, 1[section 376A, section 376 AB, 
section 376B, section 37 6C, section 376D , section 376DA or se ction DB  of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , the 
inquiry or trial shall ] be completed within a period of two months from the date of filing of the charge sheet.]  
 (2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of trial, finds it necessary or 
advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial, it may, from time to time,  for reasons 
to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such terms as it thinks fit,  for such time as it considers reasonable,  
and may by a warrant remand the accused if in custody:  
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to custody under this section for a term exceeding 
fifteen days at a time:  
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjournment or postponement shall be granted, 
without examining them, except for special reasons to be recorded in writing:  
2[Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only of enabling the accused person to 
show cause against the sentence prop osed to be imposed on him.]  
3[Provided also that — 
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the circumstances are beyond 
the control of that party;  
(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shal l not be a ground for adjournment;  
(c) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not present or the party or his pleader 
though present in Court, is not ready to examine or cross -examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, 
record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the examination -in-chief 
or cross -examination of the witness, as the case may be.]  
Explanation 1. —If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise  a suspicion that the  accused may have 
committed an offence, and it appears likely that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a  reasonable 
cause for a remand.  
Explanation 2 .—The terms on which an adjournment or postponement may be granted include, in appropriat e 
cases, the payment of costs by the prosecution or the accused.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In proviso to sub -section ( 1) of Section 309 of the Code, for the words, figures and letters “section 376, section 
376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376 D”, the words, figures and letters “section 354, section 354A, 
section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 354E, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376E, section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509 B” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 11 .] 
Maharashtra  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 16, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D  of the Indian Penal Code , the 
inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible, ” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 24 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2010).   150 
 In section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra 
(hereinafter, in this Chapter, referred to as “the Code of C riminal Procedure ”), after the existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be added, namely: — 
“Provided further that, when the enquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 332 or 353 (45 of 1860) of 
the Indian Penal Code, the inquiry or trial sha ll, as far as possible be completed within a period of six months from 
the date of filing of the charge sheet ”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act, 40 of 2018, s. 4 .] 
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 309. —In the proviso to sub -section (1) of section 309 of the pr incipal Act, for 
the words, figures and letters “section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D of 
the Indian Penal Code” the words, figures and letters “section 376, section 376A, section 376AA section 
376B, section 376C, section 37 6D or section 376DA of the Indian Penal Code” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 18]  
310. Local inspection. —(1) Any Judge or Magistrate may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding, 
after due notice to the partie s, visit and inspect any place in which an offence is alleged to have been committed, or 
any other place in which it is in his opinion necessary to view for the purpose of properly appreciating the evidence 
given at such inquiry or trial, and shall without  unnecessary delay record a memorandum of any relevant facts 
observed at such inspection.  
(2) Such memorandum shall form part of the record of the case and if the prosecutor, complainant or accused or 
any other party to the case, so desires, a copy of the memorandum shall be furnished to him free of cost.  
311. Power to summon material witness,  or examine person present .—Any Court may, at any stage of any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, summon any person as a witness, or examine any perso n in 
attendance, though not summoned as a wit ness, or recall and re -examine any person already examined; and the 
Court shall summon and examine or recall and re -examine any such person if his evidence appears to it to be 
essential to the just decision of t he case.  
1[311A. Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatures or handwriting .—If a Magistrate 
of the first class is satisfied that, for the purposes of any investigation or proceeding under this Code, it is expedient 
to direct any person , including an accused person, to give specimen signatures or handwriting, he may make an 
order to that effect and in that case the person to whom the order relates shall be produced or shall attend at the time 
and place specified in such order and shall g ive his specimen signatures or handwriting:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the person has at some time been arrested in 
connection with such investigation or proceeding.]  
312. Expenses of complainants and witnesses. —Subject to any rules made by the State Government, any 
Criminal Court may, if it thinks fit, order payment, on the part of the Government, of the reasonable expenses of any 
complainant or witness attending for the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding  before such Court under 
this Code.  
313. Power to examine the accused. —(1) In every inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling the accused 
personally to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the Court — 
(a) may at any stage, wi thout previously warning the accused put such questions to him as the Court 
considers necessary;  
(b) shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before he is called on for his 
defence, question him generally on the case:  
Provided that in a summons -case, where the Court has dispensed with the personal attendance of the accused, it 
may also dispense with his examination under clause (b).  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 27 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  151 
 (2) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is examined under sub -section (1). 
(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment by refusing to answer such questions, or by giving 
false answers to them.  
 (4) The answers given by the accused may be taken into consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put in 
evidence for or a gainst him in any other inquiry into, or trial for, any other offence which such answers may tend to 
show he has committed.  
1[(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence Counsel in preparing relevant questions which are to 
be put to the accused a nd the Court may permit filing of written statement by the accused as sufficient compliance of 
this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jharkhand  
Amendment of Section 313 .-In Section 313 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to 
the State of Jharkh and:- 
(i) In every enquiry or trial for the purpose of enabling the accused personally to explain any 
circumstances appearing in the evidence against him the Court -After the words “enabling the 
accused,” the word “in person or through the medium of electro nic video linkag ” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Jharkhand Act 2 of 2016, s. 4]  
314. Oral arguments and memorandum of arguments. —(1) Any party to a proceeding may, as soon as 
may be, after the close of his evidence, address concise oral arguments, and may, befor e he concludes the oral 
arguments, if any, submit a memorandum to the Court setting forth concisely and under distinct headings, the 
arguments in support of his case and every such memorandum shall form part of the record.  
(2) A copy of every such memorand um shall be simultaneously furnished to the opposite party.  
(3) No adjournment of the proceedings shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless 
the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such  adjournment.  
(4) The Court may, if it is of opinion that the oral arguments are not concise or relevant, regulate such 
arguments.  
315. Accused person to be competent witness. —(1) Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal 
Court shall be a competen t witness for the defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of the charges made 
against him or any person charged together with him at the same trial:  
Provided that — 
(a) he shall not be called as a witness except on his own request in writing;  
(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by any of the parties or the 
Court or give rise to any presumption against himself or any person charged together with him that the same 
trial. 
(2) Any person against whom proceeding s are instituted in any Criminal Court under section 98, or section 107 
or section 108, or section 109, or section 110, or under Chapter IX or under Part B, Part C or Part D of Chapter X, 
may offer himself as a witness in such proceedings:  
Provided that in  proceedings under section 108, section 109, or section 110, the failure of such person to give 
evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by any of the parties or the Court or give rise to any 
presumption against him or any other person proceed ed against together with him at the same inquiry.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 22 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  152 
 316. No influence to be used to induce disclosure. —Except as provided in sections 306 and 307, no influence, 
by means of any promise or threat or otherwise, shall be used to an accused person to induce him to disclose or 
withhold any matter within his knowledge.  
317. Provision for inquiries and trial being held in the absence of accused in certain cases. —(1) At any 
stage of an inquiry or trial under this Code, if the Judge or Magistrate is satisfied, for rea sons to be recorded, that the 
personal attendance of the accused before the Court is not necessary in the interests of justice, or that the accused 
persistently disturbs the proceedings in Court, the Judge or Magistrate may, if the accused is represented b y a 
pleader, dispense with his attendance and proceed with such inquiry or trial in his absence, and may, at any 
subsequent stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance of such accused.  
(2) If the accused in any such case is not represented by a pleader, or if the Judge or Magistrate considers his 
personal attendance necessary, he may, if he thinks fit and for reasons to be recorded by him, either adjourn such 
inquiry or trial, or order that the case of such accused be taken up or tried separate ly. 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the principal Act, to section 317, the following Explanation shall be added, namely:  — 
“Explanation : —For the purpose of this section “Personal attendance of the accused ” shall include his 
attendance through the medium of Ele ctronic Video Linkage as provided in section 273. ”. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 31 of 2017, s. 6 ] 
318. Procedure where accused does not understand proceedings. —If the accused, though not of unsound 
mind, cannot be made to understand the proceedings, the Court may pr oceed with the inquiry or trial; and, in the 
case of a Court other than a High Court, if such proceedings result in a conviction, the proceedings shall be 
forwarded to the High Court with a report of the circumstances of the case, and the High Court shall pass thereon 
such order as it thinks fit.  
319. Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence. —(1) Where, in the course of 
any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from the evidence that any person not being the accus ed has 
committed any offence for which such person could be tried together with the accused, the Court may proceed 
against such person for the offence which he appears to have committed.  
 (2) Where such person is not attending the Court, he may be arrested  or summoned, as the circumstances of the 
case may require, for the purpose aforesaid.  
 (3) Any person attending the Court, although not under arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by such 
Court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the off ence which he appears to have committed.  
(4) Where the Court proceeds against any person under sub -section (1), then — 
(a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be commenced afresh, and the witnesses re -heard;  
(b) subject to the provisions of clau se (a), the case may proceed as if such person had been an accused 
person when the Court took cognizance of the offence upon which the inquiry or trial was commenced.  
320. Compounding of offences. —(1) The offences punishable under the sections of the India n Penal                 
Code (45 of 1860) specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may be compounded by the persons 
mentioned in the third column of that Table: — 
 
 153 
 1[TABLE  
Offence  Section of the  Person by whom offence  
 Indian Penal  may be compounded  
 Code applicable   
          1 2 3 
Uttering words, etc., with deliberate  298 The person whose religious feelings  
intent to wound the religious   are intended to be wounded.  
feelings of any person.  
Voluntarily causing hurt.  323 The person to whom the hurt is  
  caused.  
Voluntarily causing hurt on  334 Ditto.  
provocation.  
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt  335 The person to whom the hurt is  
on grave and sudden provocation.   caused.  
Wrongfully restraining or confining  341, The person restrained or  confined.  
any person.  342 
Wrongfully confining a person for  343 The person confined.  
three days or more  
Wrongfully confining a person for  344 Ditto.  
ten days or more.  
Wrongfully confining a person in  346 The person confined.  
secret.  
Assault or use of crim inal force.  352, The person assaulted or to whom  
 355, criminal force is used.  
 358  
Theft.  379 The owner of the property stolen.  
Dishonest misappropriation of  403 The owner of the property  
property.   misappropriated.  
Criminal breach of trust by a carrier,  407 The owner of the property in respect  
wharfinger, etc.   of which the breach of trust has been  
  committed.  
Dishonestly receiving stolen  411 The owner of the property stolen.  
property knowing it to be stolen.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 23, for  the  TABLE (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   154 
          1 2 3 
Assisting in the conceal ment or  414 Ditto.  
disposal of stolen property, knowing  
it to be stolen.  
Cheating.  417 The person cheated.  
Cheating by personation.  419 Ditto.  
Fraudulent removal or concealment  421 The creditors who are affected  
of property, etc., to prevent   thereby.  
distribution among creditors.  
Fraudulently preventing from being  422 Ditto.  
made available for his creditors a  
debt or demand due to the offender.  
Fraudulent execution of deed of  423 The person affected thereby.  
transfer containing false statement  
of considera tion. 
Fraudulent removal or concealment  424 Ditto.  
of property.  
Mischief, when the only loss or  426, The person to whom the loss or  
damage caused is loss or damage to  427 damage is caused.  
a private person.  
Mischief by killing or maiming  428 The owner of t he animal.  
animal.  
Mischief by killing or maiming  429 The owner of the cattle or animal.  
cattle, etc.  
Mischief by injury to works of  430 The person to whom the loss or  
irrigation by wrongfully diverting   damage is caused.  
water when the only loss or dama ge 
caused is loss or damage to private   
person.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 155 
           1 2 3 
Criminal trespass.  447 The person in possession of the property trespassed upon.    
House -trespass.  448  Ditto.  
House -trespass to commit an  451 The person in possession of the  
offence ( other than theft) punishable   house trespassed upon.  
with imprisonment.  
Using a false trade  or property  482 The person to whom loss or injury is  
mark.   caused by such use.  
Counterfeiting a trade or property  483     Ditto.  
mark used by another.    
Knowingly  selling, or exposing or  486     Ditto.  
possessing for sale or for  
manufacturing purpose, goods  
marked with a counterfeit property   
mark.  
Criminal breach of contract of  491 The person with whom the offender  
service.   has contracted.  
Adultery.  497 The husba nd of the woman.  
Enticing or taking away or detaining  498 The husband of the woman and the  
with criminal intent a married   woman  
woman.  
Defamation, except such cases as  500 The person defamed.  
are specified against section 500 of  
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)  
in column 1 of the Table under  
sub-section ( 2). 
Printing or engraving matter,  501     Ditto.  
knowing it to be defamatory.  
Sale of printed or engraved  502     Ditto.  
substance containing defamatory  
matter, knowing it to contain such  
matter.  
Insul t intended to provoke a breach  504 The person insulted.  
of the peace.  
Criminal intimidation.  506 The person intimidated.  
Inducing person to believe himself  508 The person induced. ] 
an object of divine displeasure.   
 156 
  (2) The offences punishable under the s ections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) specified in the first two 
columns of the Table next following may, with the permission of the Court before which any prosecution for such 
offence is pending, be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third  column of that Table: — 
1[TABLE  
       Offence  Section of the  Person by whom offence  
 Indian Penal  may be compounded  
 Code applicable   
          1 2 3 
Causing miscarriage.  312 The woman to whom miscarriage is caused  .      
Voluntarily causing grievous hur t. 325 The person to whom hurt is caused.  
Causing hurt by doing an act so  337  Ditto.  
rashly and negligently as to  
endanger human life or the personal  
safety of others.  
Causing grievous hurt by doing an  338  Ditto.  
act so rashly and negligently as to  
endan ger human life or the personal  
safety of others.  
Assault or criminal force in attempt - 357 The person assaulted or to whom  
ting wrongfully to confine a person.   the force was used.    
Theft, by clerk or servant of  381 The owner of the property stolen.  
prope rty in possession of master.  
Criminal breach of trust  406 The owner of property in respect of  
  which breach of trust has  
  been committed.  
Criminal breach of trust by a clerk  408 The owner of the property in respect  
or servant.   of which the breach of t rust has been  
  committed.  
Cheating a person whose interest  418 The person cheated.  
the offender was bound, either by  
law or by legal contract, to protect.  
Cheating and dishonestly inducing  420 The person cheated.  
delivery of property or the making,  
alteration or destruction of a valuable  
security.  
Marrying again during the life -time  494 The husband or wife of the person so marrying.  
of a husband or wife.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 23, for TABLE (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  157 
           1 2 3 
Defamation against the President or the      500  The person defamed.  
Vice -Presid ent or the Governor of a    
State or the Administrator of a Union  
territory or a Minister in respect of his  
public functions when instituted upon  
a complaint made by the Public  
Prosecutor.  
Uttering words or sounds or making        509 The woman whom it wa s intended to  
gestures or exhibiting any object   insult or whose privacy was intruded  
intending to insult the modesty of a   upon. ] 
woman or intruding upon the privacy  
of a woman.  
 1[(3) When an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment of such offence or an 
attempt to commit such offence (when such attempt is itself an offence) or where the accused is liable 
under section 34 or 149 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be compounded in like manner.]  
(4) (a) When the person who would ot herwise be competent to compound an offence under this 
section is under the age of eighteen years or is an idiot or a lunatic, any person competent to contract on 
his behalf may, with the permission of the Court, compound such offence.  
(b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence under this section is 
dead, the legal representative, as defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) of such person 
may, with the consent of the Court, compound such offence.  
(5) When the  accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted and an appeal is 
pending, no composition for the offence shall be allowed without the leave of the Court to which he is 
committed, or, as the case may be, before which the appeal is to be heard.  
(6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in the exercise of its powers of revision under section 
401 may allow any person to compound any offence which such person is competent to compound under 
this section.  
(7) No offence shall be compounded if  the accused is, by reason of a previous conviction, liable either 
to enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind for such offence.  
(8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of an acquittal of the 
accused wit h whom the offence has been compounded.  
(9) No offence shall be compounded except as provided by this section.  
 
 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 o f 2009, s. 23, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  158 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 320. —In the table below sub -section (2) of Section 320 of the principal Act, - 
(i) in colum n first, second and third, before section 324 and entries relating thereto, the following 
sections and entries relating thereto shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(1) (2) (3) 
Rioting  147 The person against whom the 
force or violence is used at the 
time of commi tting an offence:  
  Provided that the accused is not 
charged with other offence 
which is not compoundable.  
Rioting armed with deadly 
weapon  148 The person against whom the 
force or violence is used at the 
time of committing an offence:  
  Provided that t he accused is not 
charged with other offence 
which is not compoundable.  
Obscene acts or use of obscene 
words  294 The person against whom 
obscene acts were done or 
obscene words were used. ”. 
(ii) in column first, second and third, after section 500 and en tries relating thereto, the following 
section and entries relating thereto shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(1) (2) (3) 
Criminal intimidation if threat 
to be caused death or grievous 
hurt, etc.  Part II of Section 506  The person against whom the 
offence of Cri minal 
Intimidation was committed. ”. 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh 17 of 1999, s. 3.]  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 320 Central Act 2 of 1974 .-In the code of criminal Procedure, 1973, in section 
320, in sub -section (2), in the Table and in the c olumn thereof ; after item, the following item and entries 
relating thereto shall be inserted, namely: - 
“marrying again during the lifetime of a 
husband or wife.  494. The husband or wife of the person so 
marrying.”  
“Husband or relative of Husband of a 
woma n subjecting her to cruelty.  498-A The women subjected to cruelty : 
Provided that a minimum period of three 
months shall elapse from the date of request 
or application for compromise before a 
Court and the Court can accept a request for 
compounding an offen ce under section 498 -
A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, provided 
none of the parties withdraw the case in the 
intervening period.”  
  
[Vide the Andhra Pradesh Act 11 of 2003, s. 2] 
 159 
 321. Withdrawal from prosecution. —The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public  Prosecutor in 
charge of a case may, with the consent of the Court, at any time before the judgment is pronounced, 
withdraw from the prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the 
offences for which he is tried; and, upo n such withdrawal, — 
(a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall be discharged in respect of 
such offence or offences;  
(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this Code no charge is required, he 
shall be acqu itted in respect of such offence or offences:  
Provided that where such offence — 
(i) was against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, or  
(ii) was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment under the Del hi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or  
(iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property belonging to the 
Central Government, or  
(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government whi le acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,  
and the Prosecutor in charge of the case has not been appointed by the Central Government, he shall not, 
unless he has been permitted by the Central Government to do so, move the Court f or its consent to 
withdraw from the prosecution and the Court shall, before according consent, direct the Prosecutor to 
produce before it the permission granted by the Central Government to withdraw from the prosecution.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In se ction 321 of the said Code, after the words “in charge of a case may” the words “on the written 
permission of the State Government to that effect (which shall be filed in Court)”, shall be inserted.   
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1991, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 321. — 
(b) for sub-section (3) the following sub -section shall be substituted,  namely : — 
“(3) When the Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and 
where the person who has suffered the loss or injury is a member of the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes and the person sentenced is not a member of such Castes or Tribes the Court shall, 
when passing judgment, order the person sentenced to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as 
may be specified in the orde r to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for 
which the person has been so sentenced. ”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1992, s. 2]  
322. Procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of. —(1) If, in the course of any inquir y 
into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate in any district, the evidence appears to him to warrant a 
presumption — 160 
 (a) that he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, or  
(b) that the case is one which should be tried or committed f or trial by some other Magistrate in 
the district, or  
(c) that the case should be tried by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he shall stay the proceedings and 
submit the case, with a brief report explaining its nature, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to s uch 
other Magistrate, having jurisdiction, as the Chief Judicial Magistrate directs.  
(2) The Magistrate to whom the case is submitted may, if so empowered, either try the case himself, 
or refer it to any Magistrate subordinate to him having jurisdiction, o r commit the accused for trial.  
323. Procedure when, after commencement of inquiry or trial, Magistrate finds case should be 
committed. —If, in any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it appears to him at any 
stage of the proceedings bef ore signing the judgment that the case is one which ought to be tried by the 
Court of Session, he shall commit it to that Court under the provisions hereinbefore contained 1[and 
thereupon the provisions of Chapter XVIII shall apply to the commitment so mad e]. 
324. Trial of persons previously convicted of offences against coinage, stamp -law or property. — 
(1) Where a person, having been convicted of an offence punishable under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) , with imprisonmen t for a term of three years or upwards, is again 
accused of any offence punishable under either of those Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three 
years or upwards, and the Magistrate before whom the case is pending is satisfied that there is ground f or 
presuming that such person has committed the offence, he shall be sent for trial to the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or committed to the Court of Session, unless the Magistrate is competent to try the case and is 
of opinion that he can himself pass an adeq uate sentence if the accused is convicted.  
 (2) When any person is sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or committed to the Court of 
Session under sub -section (1), any other person accused jointly with him in the same inquiry or trial shall 
be similarly sent or committed, unless the Magistrate discharges such other person under section 239 or 
section 245, as the case may be.  
325. Procedure when Magistrate cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe. —(1) Whenever a 
Magistrate is of opinion, after hea ring the evidence for the prosecution and the accused, that the accused 
is guilty, and that he ought to receive a punishment different in kind from, or more severe than, that which 
such Magistrate is empowered to inflict, or, being a Magistrate of the seco nd class, is of opinion that the 
accused ought to be required to execute a bond under section 106, he may record the opinion and submit 
his proceedings, and forward the accused, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom he is subordinate.  
(2) When more accu sed than one are being tried together, and the Magistrate considers it necessary to 
proceed under sub -section (1), in regard to any of such accused, he shall forward all the accused, who are 
in his opinion guilty, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom the proceedings are submitted may, if he thinks fit, 
examine the parties and recall and examine any witness who has already given evidence in the case and 
may call fo r and take any further evidence  and shall pass such judg ment, sentence or order in the case as 
he thinks fit, and is according to law.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 26 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  161 
 326. Conviction or commitment on evidence partly recorded by one Magistrate and partly by  
another. —(1) Whenever any 1[Judge or Magistrate], after having heard and recorded the w hole or any part of 
the evidence in any enquiry or a trial, ceases to exercise jurisdiction therein and is succeeded by another 
1[Judge or Magistrate] who has and who exercises such jurisdiction, the 1[Judge or Magistrate] so succeeding 
may act on the evid ence so recorded by his predecessor, or partly recorded by his predecessor and partly 
recorded by himself:  
Provided that if the succeeding 1[Judge or Magistrate] is of opinion that further examination of any of the 
witnesses whose evidence has already been  recorded is necessary in the interests of Justice, he may re -summon 
any such witness, and after such further examination, cross -examination and re -examination, if any, as he may 
permit, the witness shall be discharged.  
(2) When a case is transferred under  the provisions of this Code 2[from one judge to another Judge or from 
one Magistrate to another Magistrate], the former shall be deemed to cease to exercise jurisdiction therein, and 
to be succeeded by the latter, within the meaning of sub -section (1). 
(3) Nothing in this section applies to summary trials or to cases in which proceedings have been stayed 
under section 322 or in which proceedings have been submitted to a superior Magistrate under section 325.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 326 of the said Code, — 
(a) in sub -section (1), for the word ‘Magistrate’, wherever occurring the words “Judge or Magistrate” shall 
be substituted,  
(b) in sub -section (2), before the words “from one Magistrate, to another Magistrate”, the words from one 
Judge to another Judge or” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 19 76, s. 8] 
327. Court to be open .—3[(1)] The place in which any Criminal Court is held fo r the purpose of inquiring 
into or trying any offence shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which  the public generally may have access, 
so far as the same can conveniently contain them:  
Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into, 
or trial of, any particular case, that the public genera lly, or any particular person, shall not have access to, or be 
or remain in, the room or building used by the Court.  
4[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub - section ( 1), the inquiry into and trial of rape or an 
offence under section 376, 5[section  376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 
376DA, section 376DB] section 376E  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) ] shall be conducted in camera  : 
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an application m ade by either of the parties, 
allow any particular person to have access to, or be or remain in,  the room or building used by the Court : 
6[Provided further that in camera trial shall be conducted as far as practicable by a woman Judge or 
Magistrate.]  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 27, for “Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “from one Magistrate to another Magistr ate”(w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. S. 327 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 43 of 1983, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1983 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1978).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 2 of 2018, s. 17, for “ section 376A, section 376B, section 376C sec tion 376D ” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
6. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 24 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  162 
 (3) Where any proceedings are held under sub -section ( 2), it shall not be lawful for any person to print or  
publish any matter in relation to any such proceedings except  with the previous permission of the Court :] 
 1[Provided that the ban on printing or publi cation of trial proceedings in relation to an offence of rape may be 
lifted, subject to maintaining confidentiality of name and address of the parties.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In sub -section (2) of the section 327 of the Code, for the words, figures  and letters “or an offence under section 
376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code ”, the words, 
figures, letters and punctuations “sexual harassment, outraging modesty of woman or an offence under  section 354, 
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 354E, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, 
section 376C, section 376D, section 376E, section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B of the Indian 
Penal Code ” shall b e substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 12 ] 
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 327 .-In section 327 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), for the words, figures 
and letters “section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section  376D or section 376E of the 
Indian Penal Code” the words, figures and letters “section 376, section 376A, section 376AA, section 
376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Arunacha l Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 19]  
CHAPTER XXV  
PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND  
328. Procedure  in case of accused being lunatic .—(1) When a Magistrate holding an inquiry has reason to 
believe that the person against whom the inquiry is being h eld is of unsound mind and consequently incapable of 
making his defence, the Magistrate shall inquire into the fact of such unsoundness of mind, and shall cause such 
person to be examined by the civil surgeon of the district or such other medical officer a s the State Government may 
direct, and thereupon shall examine such surgeon or other officer as a witness, and shall reduce the examination to 
writing.   
2[(1A) If the civil surgeon finds the accused to be of unsound mind, he shall refer such person to a ps ychiatrist 
or clinical psychologist for care, treatment and prognosis of the condition and the psychiatrist or clinical 
psychologist, as the case may be, shall inform the Magistrate whether the accused is suffering from unsoundness of 
mind or mental retard ation:  
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as 
the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of — 
(a) head of psychiatry un it in the nearest government hospital; and  
 (b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college. ]  
(2) Pending such examination and inquiry, the Magistrate may deal with such person in accordance with the 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 24 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 25 , ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  163 
 provisions of section 330.  
1[(3) If s uch Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub -section ( 1A) is a person of unsound mind, 
the Magistrate shall further determine whether the unsoundness of mind renders the accused incapable of entering 
defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall record a finding to that effect, and shall 
examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but 
without questioning the accused, if he finds that no prima facie case is  made out against the accused, he shall, 
instead of postponing the enquiry, discharge the accused and deal with him in the manner provided under        
section 330:  
Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accus ed in respect of whom 
a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he shall postpone the proceeding for such period, as in the opinion of 
the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused, and order the accused to b e 
dealt with as provided under section 330.  
(4) If such Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub -section ( 1A) is a person with mental 
retardation, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the mental retardation renders the accused in capable of 
entering defence, and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall order closure of the inquiry and deal 
with the accused in the manner provided under section 330.]  
329. Procedure in case of person of unsound mind tried before Cou rt.—(1) If at the trial of any person 
before a Magistrate or  Court of Session, it appears to the Magistrate or Court that such person is of unsound mind 
and consequently incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court shall, in the first  instance,  try the fact of 
such unsoundness and incapacity, and if the Magistrate or Court, after considering such medical and other evidence 
as may be produced before him or it, is satisfied of the fact, he or it shall record a finding to that effect and shall 
postpone further proceedings in the case.  
2[(1A) If during trial, the Magistrate or Court of Sessions finds the accused to be of unsound mind, he or it shall 
refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist for care and treatment, and the psychiatr ist or clinical 
psychologist, as the case may be  shall report to the Magistrate or Court whether the accused is suffering from 
unsoundness of mind:  
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric or clinical psycholog ist, as 
the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of — 
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest government hospital; and  
(b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college.]  
3[(2) If such Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred to in sub -section ( 1A) is a person of 
unsound mind, the Magistrate or Court shall further determine whether unsoundness of mind renders the accused 
incapable of entering defence and if th e accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate or Court shall record a finding 
to that effect and shall examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of 
the accused but without questioning the accused, if the Ma gistrate or Court finds that no prima facie case is made 
out against the accused, he or it shall, instead of postponing the trial, discharge the accused and deal with him in the 
manner provided under section 330:  
Provided that if the Magistrate or Court fi nds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused in respect 
of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he shall postpone the trial for such period, as in the opinion 
of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused.  
(3) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused and he is incapable of 
entering defence by reason of mental retardation, he or it shall not hold the trial and order the accused to be de alt 
with in accordance with section 330.]  
4[330. Release of person of unsound mind pending investigation or trial. —(1) Whenever a person if found 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 5 of 2009 , s. 25, for sub -section ( 3)  (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009 ).  
2. Ins. by , s. 26 , ibid., (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  
3. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 27,  ibid., for section 330 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  164 
 under section 328 or section 329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason of unsoundness of mind or ment al 
retardation, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be shall, whether the case is one in which bail may be taken or 
not, order release of such person on bail:  
Provided that the accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind or mental retardation which does not mandate 
in-patient treatment and a friend or relative undertakes to obtain regular out -patient psychiatric treatment from the 
nearest medical facility and to prevent from doing injury to himself or to any other person.  
(2) If the case is one in wh ich, in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, bail cannot be 
granted or if an appropriate undertaking is not given, he or it shall order the accused to be kept in such a place where 
regular psychiatric treatment can be provided, and s hall report the action taken to the State Government:  
Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic asylum shall be made otherwise than in 
accordance with such rules as the State Government may have made under the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 
1987).  
(3) Whenever a person is found under section 328 or section 329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason 
of unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, shall keeping in view the 
nature of the act committed and the extent of unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, further determine if the 
release of the accused can be ordered:  
Provided that — 
(a) if on the basis of medical opinion or opinion of a specialist, the Magistrate or Court, as the  case may be, 
decide to order discharge of the accused, as provided under section 328 or section 329, such release may be 
ordered, if sufficient security is given that the accused shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any 
other person;  
(b) if the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, is of opinion that discharge of the accused cannot be 
ordered, the transfer of the accused to a residential facility for persons of unsound mind or mental retardation 
may be ordered wherein the accused may be  provided care and appropriate education and training.]  
331. Resumption of inquiry or trial. —(1) Whenever an inquiry or a trial is postponed under section 328 or 
section 329, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, may at any time after the person co ncerned has ceased to 
be of unsound mind, resume the inquiry or trial and require the accused to appear or be brought before such 
Magistrate or Court.  
(2) When the accused has been released under section 330, and the sureties for his appearance produce him  to 
the officer whom the Magistrate or Court appoints in this behalf, the certificate of such officer that the accused is 
capable of making his defence shall be receivable in evidence.  
332. Procedure on accused appearing before Magistrate or Court. —(1) If, when the accused appears or is 
again brought before the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, the Magistrate or Court considers him capable of 
making his defence, the inquiry or trial shall proceed.  
(2) If the Magistrate or Court considers the accused to be still incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate 
or Court shall act according to the provisions of section 328 or  section 329, as the case may be, and if the accused is 
found to be of unsound mind and consequently incapable making his defence, s hall deal with such accused in 
accordance with the provisions of section 330.  
333. When accused appears to have been of sound  mind. —When the accused appears to be of sound mind at 
the time of inquiry or trial, and the Magistrate i s satisfied  from the evide nce given before him that there is reason to 
believe that the accused committed an act, which, if he had been of sound mind, would have been an offence, and 
that he was, at the time when the act was committed, by reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of  knowing the 
nature of the act or that it was wrong or contrary to law, the Magistrate shall proceed with the case, and, if the 
accused ought to be tried by the Court of Session, commit him for trial before the Court of Session.  
334. Judgment of acquittal on ground of unsoundness of mind. —Whenever any person is acquitted upon the 
ground that, at the time at which he is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, by reason of unsoundness of 
mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act alleged as consti tuting the offence, or that it was wrong or contrary 
to law, the finding shall state specifically whether he committed the act or not.  
335. Person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe custody. —(1) Whenever the finding states that 
the accused per son committed the act alleged, the Magistrate or Court before whom or which the trial has been held, 165 
 shall, if such act would, but for the incapacity found, have constituted an offence, — 
 (a) order such person to be detained in safe custody in such place a nd manner as the Magistrate or Court 
thinks fit; or  
(b) order such person to be delivered to any relative or friend of such person.  
(2) No order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic asylum shall be made under clause (a) of                                          
sub-section (1) otherwise than in accordance with such rules as the State Government may have made under the 
Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 (4 of 1912).  
(3) No order for the delivery of the accused to a relative or friend shall be made under  clause (b) of                           
sub-section (1) except upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving security to the satisfaction of 
the Magistrate or Court that the person delivered shall — 
(a) be properly taken care of and prevente d from doing injury to himself or to any other person;  
(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the State Government 
may direct.  
(4) The Magistrate or Court shall report to the State Government the action taken u nder sub -section (1). 
336. Power of State Government to empower officer -in-charge to discharge. —The State Government may 
empower the officer in charge of the jail in which a person is confined under the provisions of section 330 or section 
335 to discharge  all or any of the functions of the Inspector -General of Prisons under section 337 or section 338.  
337. Procedure where lunatic prisoner is reported capable of making his defence. —If such person is 
detained under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of sectio n 330, and in the case of a person detai ned in a jail, the 
Inspector -General of Prisons, or, in the case of a person detained a lunatic asylum, the visitors of such asylum, or 
any two of them shall certify that, in his or their opinion, such person is capa ble of making his defence, he shall be 
taken before the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, at such time as the Magistrate or Court appoints, and the 
Magistrate or Court shall deal with such person under the provisions of section 332; and the certific ate of such 
Inspector -General or visitors as aforesaid shall be receivable as evidence.  
338. Procedure where lunatic detained is declared fit to be released. —(1) If such person is detained under 
the provisions of sub -section (2) of section 330, or section 335, and such Inspector -General or visitors shall certify 
that, in his or their judgment, he may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other 
person, the State Government may thereupon order him to be released, or to be detaine d in custody, or to be 
transferred to a public lunatic asylum if he has not been already sent to such an asylum; and, in case it orders him to 
be transferred to an asylum, may appoint a Commission, consisting of a Judicial and two medical officers.  
(2) Such Commission shall make a formal inquiry into the state of mind of such person, take such evidence as is 
necessary, and shall report to the State Government, which may order his release or detention as it thinks fit.  
339. Delivery of lunatic to care of rel ative or friend. —(1) Whenever any relative or friend of any person 
detained under the provisions of section 330 or section 335 desires that he shall be delivered to his care and custody, 
the State Government may, upon the application of such relative or fr iend and on his giving security to the 
satisfaction of such State Government, that the person delivered shall — 
(a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person;  
(b) be produced for the inspection of such offic er, and at such times and places, as the State Government 
may direct;  
(c) in the case of a person detained under sub -section ( 2) of section 330, be produced when required before 
such Magistrate or Court,  
order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend.  166 
  (2) If the person so delivered is accused of any offence, the trial of which has been postponed by reason of his 
being of unsound mind and incapable of making his defence, and the inspecting officer referred to in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1), certifies at any time to the Magistrate or Court that such person is capable of making his defence, 
such Magistrate or Court shall call upon the relative or friend to whom such accused was delivered to produce him 
before the Magistrate or Court; and, upon  such production the Magistrate or Court shall proceed in accordance with 
the provisions of section 332, and the certificate of the inspecting office shall be receivable as evidence.  
CHAPTER XXVI  
PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JU STICE  
340. Procedure in cases mentioned in section 195. —(1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or 
otherwise, any Court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interest s of Justice that an inquiry should be made into 
any offence referred to in clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 195, which appears to have been committed in or in 
relation to a proceeding in that Court or , as the case may be, in respect of a document produced or given in evidence  
in a proceeding in that Court, such Cou rt may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary, — 
(a) record a finding to that effect;  
(b) make a complaint thereof in writing;  
(c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction;  
(d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged 
offence is non -bailable and the Court thinks it necessary so to do, send the accused in custody to such 
Magistrate; and  
(e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence  before such Mag istrate.  
(2) The power conferred on a Court by sub -section (1) in respect of an offence may, in any case where that 
Court has neither made a complaint under sub -section (1) in respect of that offence nor rejected an application for 
the making of such compl aint, be exercised by the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the 
meaning of sub -section (4) of section 195.  
 (3) A complaint made under this section shall be signed, — 
(a) where the Court making the complaint is a High Court, by such off icer of the Court as the Court may 
appoint;  
1[(b) in any other case, by the presiding officer of the Court or by such officer of the Court as the Court 
may authori se in writing in this behalf.]  
 (4) In this section, “Court ” has the same meaning as in secti on 195.  
341. Appeal. —(1) Any person on whose application any Court other than a High Court has refused to make a 
complaint under sub -section (1)  or sub -section (2) of section 340, or against whom such a complaint has been made 
by such Court, may appeal to  the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub -section 
(4) of section 195, and the superior Court may thereupon, after notice to the parties concerned, direct the withdrawal 
of the complaint, or, as the case may be, making o f the complaint which such former Court might have made under 
section 340, and, if it makes such complaint, the provisions of that section shall apply accordingly.  
(2) An order under this section, and subject to any such order, an order under section 340, shall be final, and 
shall not be subject to revision.  
342. Power to order costs. —Any Court dealing with an application made to it for filing a complaint under 
section 340 or an  appeal under section 341, shall have power to make such order as to costs as ma y be just.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 6 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  167 
 343. Procedure of Magistrate taking  cognizance. —(1) A Magistrate to whom a complaint is made under 
section 340 or section 341 shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XV, proceed, as far as may be, to 
deal with the case as if it were  instituted on a police report.  
(2) Where it is brought to the notice of such Magistrate, or of any other Magistrate to whom the case may have 
been transferred, that an appeal is pending against the decision arrived at in the judicial proceeding out of whi ch the 
matter has arisen, he may, if he thinks fit,  at any stage, adjourn the hearing of the case until such appeal is decided.  
344. Summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence. —(1) If, at the time of delivery of any judgment 
or final order dispo sing of any judicial proceeding, a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first  class expresses an 
opinion to the effect that any witness appearing in such proceeding had knowingly or wilfully given false evidence 
or had fabricated false evidence with the i ntention that such evidence should be used in such proceeding, it or he 
may, if satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the interest of justice that the witness should be tried summarily 
for giving or fabricating, as the case may be, false evidence , take cognizance of the offence and may, after giving the 
offender a  reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished for such offence, try such 
offender summarily and sentence him to imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or to fine 
which may extend to five  hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for 
summary trials.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the  Court to make a complaint under section 340 for the 
offence, where it does not choose to proceed under this section.  
(4) Where, after any action is initiated under sub -section (1), it is made to appear to the Court of Session or 
Magistrate of the first cl ass that an appeal or an application for revision has been preferred or filed against the 
judgment or order in which the opinion referred to in that sub -section has been expressed, it or he shall stay further 
proceedings of the trial until the disposal of the appeal or the application for revision, as the case may be, and 
thereupon the further proceedings of the trial shall abide by the results of the appeal or application for revision.  
345. Procedure in certain cases of contempt. —(1) When any such offence as is described in section 175, 
section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is committed in the view 
or presence of any Civil, Criminal, or Revenue Court, the Court may cause the offender to be detained in cus tody, 
and may, at any time before the rising of the Court or the same day, take cognizance of the offence and, after giving 
the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence 
the offender to fi ne not exceeding two hundred rupees, and, in default of payment of fine,  to simple imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one month, unless such fine be sooner paid.  
(2) In every such case the Court shall record the fact constituting the offence, with  the statement (if any) made 
by the offender, as well as the finding and sentence.  
 (3) If the offence is under section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the record shall show the nature 
and stage of the judicial proceeding in which the Court inte rrupted or insulted was sitting, and the nature of the 
interruption or insult.  
346.  Procedure where Court  considers that case should not be dealt with under section 345. —(1) If the 
Court in any case considers that a person accused of any of the offences  referred to in section 345 and committed in its 
view or presence should be imprisoned otherwise than in default of payment of fine, or that a fine exceeding two 
hundred rupees should be imposed upon him, or such Court is for any other reason of opinion th at the case should not 
be disposed of under section 345, such Court, after recording  the facts constituting the offence and the statement of the 
accused as hereinbefore provided, may forward  the case to a  Magistrate  having  jurisdiction  to try  the sa me, and 
may require security to be given for the appearance of such person before such Magistrate, or if sufficient security is 
not given, shall forward such person in custody to such Magistrate.  
(2) The Magistrate to whom any case is forwarded under this section shall proceed to deal with, as far as  may 168 
 be, as if it were instituted on a police report.  
347. When Registrar or Sub -Registrar to be deemed a Civil Court. —When the State Government so directs, 
any Registrar or any Sub -Registrar appointed under the  1*** Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), shall be deemed to 
be a Civil Court within the meaning of sections 345 and 346.  
348. Discharge of offender on submission of apology. —When any Court has under section 345 adjudged an 
offender to punishment, or has under section 346 forwarded him to a Magistrate for trial, for refusing or omitting to 
do anything which he was lawfully required to do or for any intentional insult or interruption, the Court may,  in its 
discretion, discharge the offender or remit the pun ishment on his submission to th e order or requisition of such 
Court, or on apology being made to its satisfaction.  
349. Imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or produce document. —If any witness or 
person called to produce a document or thi ng before a Criminal Court refuses to answer such questions as are put to 
him or to produce any document or thing in his possession or power which the Court requires him to produce, and 
does not, after a reasonable opportunity has been given to him so to d o, offer any reasonable excuse for such refusal, 
such Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, sentence him to simple imprisonment, or by warrant under the 
hand of the Presiding Magistrate or Judge commit him to the custody of an officer of the Co urt for any term not 
exceeding seven days, unless in the meantime, such person consents to be examined and to answer, or to produce the 
document or thing and in the event of his persisting in his refusal, he may be dealt with according to the provisions 
of section 345 or section 346.  
350. Summary procedure for punishment for non -attendance by a witness in obedience to summons. —(1) 
If any witness being summoned to appear before a Criminal Court is legally bound to appear at a certain place and 
time in obedie nce to the summons and without just excuse neglects or  refuses to attend at that place or time or 
departs from the place where he has to attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, and the Court 
before which the witness is to appear is satisfied that it i s expedient in the interest of j ustice that such a witness 
should be tried summarily, the Court may take cognizance of the offence and after giving the offender an 
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this sec tion, sentence him to fine not exceeding 
one hundred rupees.  
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for 
summary trials.  
351. Appeals from convictions under sections 344, 345, 349 and 350. —(1) Any person sentenced by any 
Court other than a High Court under section 344, section 345, section 349, or section 350 may, notwithstanding  
anything contained in this Code appeal to the Court to which decrees or orders made in such Court are ordinarily 
appealable.  
(2) The provisions of Chapter XXIX shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to appeals under this section, and 
the Appellate Court may alter or reverse the finding, or reduce or reverse the sentence appealed against.  
(3) An appeal from such co nviction by a Court of Small Causes shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions 
division within which such Court is situate.  
 (4) An appeal from such conviction by any Registrar or Sub -Registrar deemed to be a  Civil Court by virtue of a 
direction is sued under section 347 shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions division within which the office  
of such Registrar or Sub -Registrar is situate.  
352. Certain Judges and Magistrates not to try certain offences when committed before themselves. —
Exce pt as provided in sections 344, 345, 349 and 350, no Judge of a  Criminal Court (other than a Judge of a High 
Court) or Magistrate shall try any person for any offence referred to in section 195, when such offence is committed 
before himself or  in contempt of his authority, or  is brought under his notice as such Judge or Magistrate in the 
course of a judicial proceeding.  
                                                 
1. The word “Indian” omitted by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule  (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  169 
 CHAPTER XXVII  
THE JUDGMENT  
353. Judgment. —(1) The judgment in every trial in any Criminal Court or original jurisdiction shall be 
pronounc ed in open Court by the presiding officer immediately after the termination of the trial or at some 
subsequent time of which notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders, — 
(a) by delivering the whole of the judgment; or  
(b) by reading out the who le of the judgment; or  
(c) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and explaining the substance of the judgment in a 
language which is understood by the accused or his pleader.  
(2) Where the judgment is delivered under clause (a) of sub -section (1), the presiding officer shall cause it to be 
taken down in short -hand, sign the transcript and every page thereof as soon as it is made ready, and write on it the 
date of the delivery of the judgment in open Court.  
(3) Where the judgment or the operativ e part thereof is read out under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub -section (1), 
as the case may be, it shall be dated and signed by the presiding officer in open Court, and if it is not written with his 
own hand, every page of the judgment shall be signed by  him. 
(4) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner specified in clause (c) of sub -section (1), the whole 
judgment or a copy thereof shall be immediately made  available for the perusal of the parties or their pleaders free 
of cost.  
(5) If the accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear the judgment pronounced.  
(6) If the accused is not in custody, he shall be required by the Court to attend to hear the judgment pronounced, 
except where his personal attendance during the trial has been dispens ed with and the sentence is one of fine only or 
he is acquitted:  
Provided that, where there are more accused than one, and one or more of them do not attend the Court on the 
date on which the judgment is to be pronounced, the presiding officer may, in orde r to avoid undue delay in the 
disposal of the case, pronounce the judgment notwithstanding their absence.  
 (7) No judgment delivered by any Criminal Court shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the absence 
of any party or his pleader on the day or  from the place notified for the delivery thereof, or of any omission to serve, 
or defect in serving, on the parties or their pleaders, or any of them, the notice of such day and place.  
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the  extent of the provisions of section 465.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jharkhand  
Amendment of Section 353(5). -In Section 353(5) of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application 
to the State of Jharkhand: - 
(i) If accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear the Judgement pronounced. After the 
words “he shall be brought up” the word “in person or through the medium of electronic video 
linkage” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Jharkhand Act 2 of 2016, s. 5]  
354. Language and contents of judgment. —(1) Except as ot herwise expressly provided by this Code, every 
judgment referred to in section 353, — 170 
 (a) shall be written in the language of the Court;  
(b) shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision;  
 (c) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the section of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or 
other law under which, the accused is convicted, and the puni shment to which he is sentenced;  
(d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state the offence o f which the accused is acquitted and direct that 
he be set at liberty.  
(2) When the conviction is under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and it is doubtful under which of two 
sections, or under which of two parts of the same section, of that Code the off ence falls, the Court shall distinctly 
express the same, and pass judgment in the alternative.  
(3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or, in the alternative, with imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgm ent shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded, and, in the case 
of sentence of death, the special reasons for such sentence.  
(4) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of one year or more, but the 
Court imposes  a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months, it shall record its reasons for 
awarding such sentence, unless the sentence is one of imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless the case was 
tried summarily under the provisions of  this Code.  
(5) When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he be hanged by the neck till he is 
dead.  
(6) Every order under section 117 or sub -section (2) of section 138 and every final order made under section 
125, section 145 or  section 147 shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and the 
reasons for the decision.  
355. Metropolitan Magistrate's judgment. —Instead of recording a judgment in the manner hereinbefore 
provided, a Metropolitan Magistrate  shall record the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the serial number of the case;  
(b) the date of the commission of the offence;  
(c) the name of the complainant (if any);  
(d) the name of the accused person, and his parentage and residence;  
(e) the offen ce complained of or proved;  
(f) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);  
(g) the final order;  
(h) the date of such order;                                    
(i) in all cases in which an appeal lies from the final order either under section 373  or under sub -section (3) 
of section 374, a brief statement of the reasons for the decision.  
356. Order for notifying address of previously convicted offender. —(1) When any person, having been 
convicted by a Court in India of an offence punishable under se ction 215, section 489A, section 489B, section 489C 171 
 or section 489D  1[or section 506 (in so far as it relates to criminal intimidation punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years , or with fine , or with both )] of the Indian Penal  Code (45 of 1860), or of any 
offence punishable under Chapter XII  1[or Chapter XVI] or Chapter XVII o f that C ode, with imprisonment for a 
term of three years, or upwards, is again convicted of any offence punishable under any of those sections or 
Chapter s with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards by any Court other than that of a Magistrate of the 
second class, such Court may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing a sentence of imprisonment on such person, also 
order that his residence  and any change of, or absence  from, such residence after release be notified as hereinafter 
provided for a term not exceeding five years from the date of the expiration of such sentence.  
 (2) The provisions of sub -section (1) with reference to the offences na med therein, apply also to criminal 
conspiracies to commit such offences and to the abatement of such offences and attempts to commit them.  
(3) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall become void.  
(4) An order under this se ction may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision.  
(5) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this section relating to 
the notification  of residence or change of, or absence from, residence by released convicts.  
(6) Such rules may provide for punishment for the breach thereof and any person charged with a breach of any 
such rule may be tried by a Magistrate of competent jurisdiction in th e district in which the place last notified by him 
as his place of residence is situated.  
357. Order to pay compensation. —(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a 
sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, w hen passing judgment, order the whole or any part of 
the fine recovered to be applied — 
(a) in defraying the expenses of properly incurred in the prosecution;  
(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused by the offence, whe n 
compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by such person in a Civil Court;  
(c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having caused the death of another person or of having 
abetted the commission of such an offence, in paying com pensation to the persons who are, under the Fatal 
Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855), entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced for the loss resulting 
to them from such death;  
(d) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft, criminal misappropriation, criminal 
breach of trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly received or retained, or of having voluntarily assisted in 
disposing of, stolen property knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen, in compensating a ny 
bona fide  purchaser of such property for the loss of the same if such property is restored to the possession of the 
person entitled thereto.  
(2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal no such payment shall be made before the period 
allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal be presented, before the decision of the appeal.  
(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the accused person to pay,  by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to 
the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been so 
sentenced.  
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellat e Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 29 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  172 
 (5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter, the Court  
shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compe nsation under this section.  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Karnataka  
Amendments of section 357 . — 
In section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974). — 
(1) In section 357, in sub -section ( 1), after the words “the Court may ” the brackets, figure s and words 
“and where the person against whom an offence is committed belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe as defined in clauses (24) and (25) of  Article 366  of the Constitution and the accused 
person doesn ’t belong to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe the Court shall ”, shall be inserted : 
(2) for sub -section ( 3), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(3) When a Court imposes a sentence of which the fine does not form a part, the Court may, and 
where a person against wh om an offence is committed belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe 
as defined in clauses (24) and (25) of  article 366  of the Constitution and the accused person does not 
belong to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, the Court shall , when pass ing judgment , order the 
accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to the 
person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accus ed person has been so 
sentenced ”. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 27 of 1987, s. 2]  
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of section 357. —In section 357 of the Principal Act,  — 
 (i) In sub -section ( 1), for the brackets, figure and words “(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine 
or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of  which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied ” the brackets, figure and words 
“(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of wh ich fine 
forms a part, the Court may, and where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs to  
Scheduled Caste s or Scheduled Tribe s as defined in clauses ( 24) and ( 25) and of Article 366 of the 
Constitution except when both the accused person an d the person against whom an offence is committed 
belong cither to such Castes or Tribes, the Court shall, when passing judgment, order the whole or any 
part of the fine recovered to be applied —”shall be substituted; and  
(ii) for sub -section ( 3), the follo wing sub -section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(3) When Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and where a 
person against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as 
defined in cla uses ( 24) and ( 25) of Article 366 of the Constitution, the Court shall when passing judgment 
order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to 
the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason o f the act for which the accused person has been 
so sentenced:  
“Provided that the Court may not order the accused person to pay by way of compensation any amount 
if both the accused person and the person against whom an offence is committed belong either to  the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes. ” 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 29 of 1978, s. 3.]  173 
 West Bengal  
In section 357 of the principal Act, —  
(a) In sub -section ( 1), for the words and brackets “When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a 
sentence includ ing a (sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied —”, the words and brackets 
“When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a senten ce of death) of which fine 
forms a part, the Court may, and where the person against whom an offence has been committed belongs 
to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, except when both the accused person and the person against 
whom an offence has been com mitted belong either to Scheduled Castes or to Scheduled Tribes shall, 
when passing judgment , order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied —” shall be 
substituted;  
(b) for sub -section ( 3), the following sub -section shall be substituted, n amely: — 
“(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and where 
the person against whom an offence has been committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled 
Tribes, shall, when passing judgment order the accused  person to pay, by way of compensation, such 
amount as may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the 
act for which the accused person has been so sentenced:  
Provided that the Court may not order the accuse d person to pay by way of compensation, any amount 
if both the accused person and the person against whom an offence has been committed belong either to 
Scheduled Castes or to Scheduled Tribes. ”; 
(c) after sub -section ( 5), the following Explanation shall b e inserted :— 
‘Explanation .—For the purposes of the section the expression “Scheduled Castes ” and “Scheduled 
Tribes ” shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in clauses (24) and (25) of Article 366 of 
the Constitution of India .’.  
[Vide West Ben gal Act 33 of 1985, s. 3.]  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
 Amendment of section 357 Central Act 2 of 1974 .-In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974 in its 
application to the State of Andhra Pradesh, in section 357, - 
(i) in sub -section (1), after the words “th e Court may”, the expression “and where a person 
against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as defined in 
clauses (24) and (25) of article 366 of the Constitution of India except when both the accused persons 
and t he person against whom an offence is committed belong either to such castes or tribes, the Court 
shall, “ shall be inserted and  
(ii) for sub -section (3), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: -  
“(3) When a Court imposes a sentence of whi ch fine does not form a part, the Court may, and 
where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled 
Tribes as defined in clauses (24) and (25) of article 366 of the Constitution of India, the Court Shall, 
when pass ing judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as 
may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for 
which the accused person has been so sentenced:  
Provided that the  Court may not order the accused person to pay by way of compensation any 
amount, if both the accused person and the person against whom an offence is committed belong 
either to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 21 of 1 993, s. 2]  174 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), after  the clause  (d), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely : — 
“Provided that if a person who may receive compensation under clauses ( b), (c) and ( d) is a 
member of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and the person sentenced is not a member 
of such Castes or Tribes, the Court shall order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be 
applied in payment of such compensation.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1992, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act II of 1974).  —In sub -
section ( 1) of Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (II of 1974) the following proviso 
shall be added nam ely: — 
“Provided that the person against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes and to  
Scheduled Tribes as defined under clause ( 24) and clause ( 25) to Article 366 of the Constitution, the  
Court shall at the time of judgment pass order th at the entire amount of fine realised or any part of it  will 
be utilised for the benefit of such person by way of compensation. ”  
[Vide Bihar Act 9 of 1985, s. 2]  
1[357A. Victim compensation scheme .—(1) Every State Government in co -ordination with the 
Cent ral Government shall prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the 
victim or his dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and who require 
rehabilitation.  
(2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the  Court for compensation, the District Legal Service 
Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may be, shall decide the quantum of 
compensation to be awarded under the scheme referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) If the trial Court, at the c onclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the compensation  awarded 
under  section  357 is not adequate for  such rehabilitation, or where the cases end in acquittal or discharge 
and the victim has to be rehabilitated, it may make recommendation for compensat ion. 
(4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is identified, and where no trial takes 
place, the victim or his dependents may make an application to the State or the District Legal Services 
Authority for award of compensation.  
(5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub -section ( 4), the State or the 
District Legal Services Authority shall, after due enquiry award adequate compensation by completing the 
enquiry within two months.  
(6) The State or the Distr ict Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, to alleviate the suffering of 
the victim, may order for immediate first -aid facility or medical benefits to be made available free of cost 
on the certificate of the police officer not below the rank of the officer in charge of the police station or a 
Magistrate of the area concerned, or any other interim relief as the appropriate authority deems fit.]  
2[357B. Compensation to be in addition to fine under section 326A or section 376D of Indian 
Penal Code .—The compensation payable by the State Government under section 357A shall be in 
addition to the payment of fine to the victim 3[under section 326A , section 376AB, section 376D, section 
376DA and section 376D B of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) ]. 
 
 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  28 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 23 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 18, for “ under section 326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)”  (w.e.f. 21 -4-
2018).  175 
 STATE AME NDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 357B .—In section 357B of the principal Act, for the words, figures and letters 
“section 326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code” the words, figures ad letters “section 326A, 
376D or section 376DA of the Indian Penal Code” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 20]  
357C. Treatment of victims .—All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central 
Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immedi ately, provide the first -
aid or medical treatment, free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under section 326A, 376, 
1[376A, 376AB, 376B, 376 C, 376D , 376DA, 376DB ] or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 
1860) , and shall immediately info rm the police of such incident.]  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of 21 section 357C .—In section 357C of the principal Act, for the words, figures and 
letters “section 326A, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code “the 
words, figures and letters “section 326A, 376AA, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA or section 376E of the 
Indian Penal Code” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 21]  
358. Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested. —(1) Whenever any  person causes a po lice 
officer to arrest another person, if it appears to the Magistrate by  whom the case is heard that there was 
no sufficient ground for causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding 
2[one thousand  rupee s], to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested, for his loss 
of time and expenses in the matter, as the Magistrate thinks fit.  
(2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the Magistrate may, in like manner, award  to 
each of them such compensation, not exceeding 2[one thousand  rupees ], as such Magistrate thinks fit.  
 (3) All compensation awarded under this section may be recovered as if it were a fine,  and, if it 
cannot be so recovered, the person by whom it is pay able shall be sentenced to simple imprisonment for 
such term not exceeding thirty days as  the Magistrate directs, unless such sum is sooner paid.  
359. Order to pay costs in non -cognizable cases .—(1) Whenever any complaint of a non -
cognizable offence is mad e to a Court, the Court, if it convicts the accused, may, in addition to the penalty 
imposed upon him, order him to pay to the complainant, in whole or in part, the cost incurred by him in 
the prosecution, and may further order that in default of payment, the accused shall suffer simple 
imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days and such costs may include any expenses incurred in 
respect of process -fees, witnesses and pleader's fees which the Court may consider reasonable.  
(2) An order under this s ection may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or 
Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.  
360. Order to release on probation of good conduct or after admonition. —(1) When any person 
not under twenty -one years of age is convicted of an offence punishable with fine only or with 
imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or when any person under twenty -one years of age or any 
woman is convicted of an offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and no pr evious 
conviction is proved against the offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard 
being had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in which the 
offence was committed, that it is expedi ent that   the  offender should be released on probation of good 
conduct,  the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that he be released 
on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence w hen called upon 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 22 of 2018 , s. 19,  for “376A, 376B, 376C, 376D”  (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 30 , for “one  hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  176 
 during such period (not exceeding three years) as the Court may direct, and in the meantime to keep the 
peace and be of good behaviour:  
Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a Magistrate of the second class not specially 
empowered by the High Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that the powers conferred by this section 
should be exercised, he shall record his opinion to that effect, and submit the proceedings to a Magistrate 
of the first class, forwarding the accused to,  or taking bail for his appearance before, such Magistrate, who 
shall dispose of the case in the manner provided by sub -section (2). 
(2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first class as provided by sub -section ( 1), such 
Magistrate may thereupon pass such sentence or make such order as he might have passed or made if the case 
had originally been heard by him, and, if he thinks further inquiry or additional evidence on any point to be 
necessary, he may make such inquiry or take such evide nce himself or direct such inquiry or evidence to be 
made or taken.  
(3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, theft in a building, dishonest misappropriation, 
cheating or any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), punishable with not more than two 
years, imprisonment or any offence punishable with fine only and no previous conviction is proved 
against him, the Court before which he is so convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to the age, 
character, antecedents or  physical o r mental condition of the offender and to the trivial nature of the 
offence or any extenuating circumstances under which the offence was committed, instead of sentencing 
him to any punishment, release him after due admonition.  
(4) An order under this secti on may be made by any Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision.  
(5) When an order has been made under this section in respect of any offender, the High Court or 
Court of Session may, on appeal when the re is a right of appeal to such Court, or when exercising its 
powers of revision, set aside such order, and in lieu thereof pass sentence on such offender according to 
law: 
Provided that the High Court or Court of Session shall not under this sub -section i nflict a greater 
punishment than might have been inflicted by the Court by which the offender was convicted.  
(6) The provisions of sections 121, 124 and 373 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of sureties 
offered in pursuance of the provisions of th is section.  
(7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender under sub -section ( 1), shall be satisfied that 
an offender or his surety (if any) has a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place for which 
the Court acts or in which the offender is likely to live during the period named for the observance of the 
conditions.  
 (8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court which could have dealt with the offender in 
respect of his original offence, is satisfied that the offender has failed to observe any of the conditions of 
his recognizance, it may issue a warrant for his apprehension.  
(9) An offender, when apprehended on any such warrant, shall be brought forthwith before the Court 
issuing the warrant, and such Court may either remand him in custody until the case is heard or admit him 
to bail with a sufficient surety conditioned on his appearing for sentence and such Court may, after 
hearing the case, pass sentence.  
(10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the  Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 
1958), or the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960) or any other law for the time being in force for the 
treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders.  
361. Special reasons to be recorded in  certain cases. —Where in any case the Court could have 
dealt with, — 
(a) an accused person under section 360 or under the provisions of the Probation of Offenders 
Act, 1958 (20 of 1958); or  
 (b) a youthful offender under the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960) or any other law  for the time 177 
 being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders,  
but has not done so, it shall record in its judgment the special reasons for not having done so.  
362. Court not to alter judgment. —Save as otherwise provided  by this Code or by any other law for the time 
being in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case, shall alter or review the 
same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error.  
363. Copy of judgment to be give n to the accused and other persons. —(1) When the accused is sentenced to 
imprisonment, a copy of the judgment shall, immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment, be given to him 
free of cost.  
(2) On the application of the accused, a certified copy of the judgment, or when he so desires, a translation in 
his own language if practicable or in the language of the Court, shall be given to him without delay, and such copy 
shall, in every case where the judgment is appealable by the accused, be given free  of cost:  
Provided that where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, a certified copy of the 
judgment shall be immediately given to the accused free of cost whether or not he applies for the same.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section (2) shall apply in relation to an order under section 117 as they apply in 
relation to a judgment which is appealable by the accused.  
(4) When the accused is sentenced to death by any Court and an appeal lies from such judgment as of right, the 
Court shall i nform him of the period within which, if he wishes to appeal, his appeal should be preferred.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), any person affected by a judgment or order passed by a 
Criminal Court shall, on an application made in this beh alf and on payment of the prescribed charges, be given a 
copy of such judgment or order or of any deposition or other part of the record:  
Provided that the Court may, if it thinks fit  for some special reason, give it to him free of cost.  
(6) The High Court  may, by rules, provide for the grant of copies of any judgment or order of a Criminal Court 
to any person who is not affected by a judgment or order, on payment, by such person, of such fees, and subject to 
such conditions, as the High Court may, by such rules, provide.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
 Amendment of section  363.- In section 363 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act of 1974), 
after the proviso to sub -section (5), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 
 “Provided further t hat the State shall, on an applicat ion made in this behalf by the P rosecuting Officer be given, 
free of cost, a certified copy of such judgement, order, deposition or record with the prescribed endorsement ”. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 19 of 1985, s. 2.]  
364. Judg ment when to be translated. —The original  judgment shall be filed with the record of the 
proceedings a nd where the original is recorded in a language different from that of the Court, and the accused so 
requires, a translation thereof into the language of t he Court shall be added to such record.  
365. Court  of Session to send copy of finding and sentence to District Magistrate. —In cases tried by the Court  
of Session or a Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Court or such Magistrate, as the case may be, shall forwar d a copy  of its 
or his finding and sentence (if any) to the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the trial was held.  
CHAPTER XXVIII  
SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION  
366. Sentence of death to be submitted by Court of Session for  confirmation. —(1) When the Court of  
Session passes a sentence of death, the proceedings shall be submitted to the High Court, and the sentence shall not 
be executed unless it is confirmed by the High Court.  
(2) The Court passing the sentence shall commit the convicted person to jail custody under a warrant.  
367. Power to direct further inquiry to be made or additional evidence to be taken. —(1) If, when such 
proceedings are submitted, the High Court thinks that a further inquiry should be made into, or addi tional evidence 178 
 taken upon, any point bearing upon the guilt or innocence of the convicted person, it may make such 
inquiry or take such evidence itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of Session.  
 (2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs , the presence of the convicted person may  be dispensed 
with when such inquiry is made or such evidence is taken.  
(3) When the inquiry or evidence (if any) is not made or taken by the High Court, the result of such 
inquiry or evidence shall be certified to  such Court.  
368. Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction. —In any case submitted under                   
section 366, the High Court — 
(a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence warranted by law, or  
(b) may annul the convic tion, and convict the accused of any offence of which the Court of 
Session might have convicted him, or order a new trial on the same or an amended charge, or  
(c) may acquit the accused person:  
Provided that no order of confirmation shall be made under thi s section until the period allowed for 
preferring an appeal has expired, or, if an appeal is presented within such period, until such appeal is 
disposed of.  
369. Confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges. —In every case so submitted, the 
confi rmation of the sentence, or any new sentence or order passed by the High Court, shall, when such 
Court consists of two or more Judges, be made, passed and signed by at least two of them.  
370. Procedure in case of difference of opinion. —Where any such case is heard before a Bench of 
Judges and such Judges are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be decided in the manner provided 
by section 392.  
371. Procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation. —In cases submitted by the 
Court of Session to the High Court for the confirmation of a sentence of death, the proper officer of the 
High Court shall,  without delay, after the order of confirmation or other order has been made by the High 
Court, send a copy of the order, under the seal of the High C ourt and attested with his official  signature, 
to the Court of Session.  
CHAPTER XXIX  
APPEALS  
372. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided. —No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order 
of a Criminal Court except as provided for by this Code by any othe r law for the time being in force:  
1[Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order passed by the Court 
acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing inadequate compensation, and such 
appeal shall lie to the Court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such 
Court.]  
373. Appeal from orders requiring security or refusal to accept or rejecting surety for keeping 
peace or good behaviour. —Any person, — 
(i) who has been order ed under section 117 to give security for keeping the peace or for good  
behaviour, or  
(ii) who is aggrieved by any order refusing to accept or rejecting a surety under section 121,  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 29 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  179 
 may appeal against such order to the Court of Session:  
Provided that nothi ng in this section shall apply to persons the proceedings against whom are laid 
before a Sessions Judge in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) of                        
section 122.  
374. Appeals from convictions. —(1) Any pe rson convicted on a trial held by a High Court in its 
extraordinary original criminal jurisdiction may appeal to the Supreme Court.  
 (2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge or on a 
trial held by any othe r court in which a sentence of imprisonment for more  than seven years 1[has been 
passed against him or against any other person convicted at the same trial], may appeal to the High Court.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), any person, — 
(a) convicted on a trial held by a Metropolitan Magistrate or Assistant Sessions Judge or 
Magistrate of the first  class, or of the second class, or  
(b) sentenced under section 325, or  
(c) in respect of whom an order has been made or a sentence has been passed  under section 360 
by any Magistrate,   
may appeal to the Court of Session.  
2[(4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 376, section 376A, 
section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB  or section 
376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months 
from the date of filing of such appeal.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
In Section 374 of the Code, in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3), for the words  “Magistrate of the first 
class, or of the second class,” the words “Magistrate of the first class, Executive Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the second class,” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3( 3) and the Schedule. ] 
Manipur  
In section 37 4 of the Code, in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) for the words “Magistrate of the first class or 
of the second class the words “Magistrate of the first class, Specified Executive Magistrate or Magistrate 
of the second class” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and The Schedule]  
375. No  appeal in certain cases when  accused pleads guilty. —Notwithstanding anything contained 
in section 374, where an accused person has pleaded guilty and has been convicted on such plea, there 
shall be no a ppeal, — 
(a) if the conviction is by a High Court; or  
(b) if the conviction is by a Court of Session, Metropolitan Magistrate or Magistrate of the first or 
second class, except as to the extent or legality of the sentence.  
376. No appeal in  petty cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 374, there shall be 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 28, for “has been passed”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 2 2 of 2018, s. 20 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  180 
 no appeal by a convicted person in any of the following cases, namely: — 
(a) where a High Court passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding six 
months or of fine  not exceedin g one thousand rupees, or of both such imprisonment and fine;  
(b) where a Court of Session or a Metropolitan Magistrate passes only a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, or 
of both suc h imprisonment and fine;  
(c) where a Magistrate of the first class passes only a sentence of fine not exceeding one hundred 
rupees; or  
(d) where, in a case tried summarily, a Magistrate empowered to act under section 260 passes 
only a sentence of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees:  
Provided that an appeal may be brought against such sentence if any other punishment is combined 
with it, but such sentence shall not be appealable merely on the ground — 
(i) that the person convicted is ordered to furnish  security to keep the peace; or  
(ii) that a direction for imprisonment in default of payment of fine is included in the sentence; or  
(iii) that more than one sentence of fine is passed in the case, if the total amount of fine imposed 
does not exceed the amount hereinbefore specified in respect of the case.  
377. Appeal by the State Government against sentence. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), 
the State Government may, in any case of conviction on a trial held by any Court other than a High Court , direct the 
Public Prosecutor to present 1[an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy — 
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and  
 (b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court .] 
(2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has been investigated by the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment, constituted under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by any other 
agency empowered to make investigati on into an offence under any Central Act other than this Code, 2[the Central 
Government may also direct] the Public Prosecutor to present 1[an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its 
inadequacy — 
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is pass ed by the Magistrate; and  
(b) to the High Court, if the senten ce is passed by any other Court ]. 
(3) When an appeal has been filed against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy, 3[the Court  of Session 
or, as the case may be, the High Court]  shall not  enhance the sentence except after giving to the accused a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such enha ncement and while showing cause,  the accused may 
plead for his acquittal or for the reduction of the sentence.  
4[(4) When an appeal has been  filed against a sentence passed under section 376, section 376A, section 376AB, 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860), the appeal shall be disposed of within a period o f six months from the date of filing of such appeal. ] 
378. Appeal in case of acquittal. —5[(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), and subject to the 
provisions of sub -sections (3) and (5),— 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 3 1, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 2 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 31,  for “the High Court” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 21 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
5. Subs. by  Act 25 of 2005, s. 32, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  181 
 (a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct th e Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the Court of 
Session from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non -bailable offence;  
(b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an ap peal to the High 
Court from an original or appellate order of acquittal passed by any Court other than a High Court  [not being an 
order under clause ( a)] or an order of acquittal passed by the  Court of Session in revision.]  
(2) If such an order of acquitta l is passed in any case in which the offence has been investigated by the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment constituted under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by 
any other agency empowered to make investigation into an off ence under any Central Act other than this Code, 1[the 
Central Government may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an 
appeal — 
(a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistr ate in respect of a cognizable and 
non-bailable offence;  
 (b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed by any Court other than a 
High Court [not being an order under clause ( a)] or an order of acquittal passed by t he Cou rt of Session in 
revision ]. 
(3) 2[No appeal to the High Court]  under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) shall be entertained except with the 
leave of the High Court.  
(4) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon complaint and the High Court, on an 
application made to it by the complainant in this behalf, grants special leave to appeal from the order of acquittal, 
the complainant may present such an appeal to the High Court.  
(5) No application under sub -section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall 
be entertained by the High Court after the expiry of six months, where the complainant is a public servant, and sixty 
days in every other case, computed from the date of that order of acquittal.  
 (6) If, in any case, the application under sub -section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of 
acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order of acquittal shall lie under sub -section (1) or under sub -section (2). 
379. Appeal against con viction by High Court in certain cases. —Where the High Court has, on appeal, 
reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and convicted him and sentenced him to death or to 
imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a term of ten years or more, he  may appeal to the Supreme Court.  
380. Special right of appeal in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, when 
more persons than one are convicted in one trial, and an appealable judgment or order has been passed in respect of 
any of such persons, all or any of the persons convicted at such trial shall have a right of appeal.  
381. Appeal to Court of Session how heard. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (2), an appeal to the 
Court of Session or Sessions Judge shall be hea rd by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional Sessions Judge:  
Provided that an appeal against a conviction on a trial held by a Magistrate of the second class may be heard 
and disposed of by an Assistant Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(2) An Additional Sessions Judge, Assistant Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall hear only such 
appeals as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or special order, make over to him or as the High 
Court may, by special order, direct him  to hear.    
382. Petition of appeal. —Every appeal shall be made in the form of a petition in writing presented by the 
appellant or his pleader, and every such petition shall (unless the Court to which it is presented otherwise directs) be 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 25 of 2005 , s. 32, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by   s. 32, ibid., for “No appeal” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  182 
 accompanied by a copy of the judgment or order appealed against.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
Section 382 shall be re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section, and sub -section ( 1) as so                       
re-numbered , the following provisos and Explanation  shall be added, namely:  — 
“Provided that where it is not practicable to file the petition of appeal to the proper Appellate Court, 
the petition of appeal may be presented to the Administrato r or to an Executive Magistrate, not below the 
rank of Sub -Divisi onal Magistrate, who shall forward the same to  the proper Appellate Court; and, when 
any such appeal is presented to the Administrator or to an Executive Magistrate, he shall record thereon 
the date of its  date of presentation and, if he is satisfied that, by reason of the weather, transport or other 
difficulties, it is not possible for the appellant to obtain, from the proper Appellate Court, orders for the 
suspension of sentence or for bail , he may, in respect of such appeal, or an appeal forwarded to him under 
section 383, exercise all or any of the powers of the proper Appellate Court and sub -section (1) of section 
389 with regard to suspension of sentence or release of a convicted person on bail:  
Provided further that the order so made by Administrator or the Executive Magistrate shall have 
effect until it is reversed or modified by the proper Appellate Court.  
Explanation :—For the purposes of the provisos to this section , and section 383, ‘Administrator ’, in 
relation to a Union territory means the Administrator appointed by the President under  article 239  of the 
Constitution, for that Union territory. ”; 
In section 382 after sub -section ( 1) as so re -numbered, the following sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“(2) For purposes of computation of the period of limitation, and for all other purposes, an appeal 
presented to an Administrator or an Executive Magistrate under sub -section (1) or as the case may be, 
under section 383, shall be deem ed to be an appeal presented to the proper Appellate Court. ”; 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974) s. 5.] 
383. Procedure when appellant in jail. —If the appellant is in jail, he may present his petition of appeal  and 
the copies accompanying the same to the officer in charge of the jail, who shall thereupon forward such petition and 
copies to the proper Appellate Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lak shadweep  
In section 383, the following words shall be inserted at the end, namely:  — 
“or if, by reason of the weather, transport or other difficulties, it is not possible to forward them to the 
proper Appellate Court they shall be forwarded to the Administ rator or an Executive Magistrate, not 
below the rank of a Sub -Divisional Magistrate, who shall, on receipt of such petition of appeal and copies, 
record thereon the date of receipt thereof and thereafter forward the same to the proper Appellate Court. ”. 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 5.] 
384. Summary dismissal of appeal. —(1) If upon examining the petition of appeal and copy of the judgment 
received under section 382 or section 383, the Appellate Court c onsiders that there is no sufficient ground for 
interfering, it may dismiss the appeal summarily:  183 
 Provided that — 
(a) no appeal presented under section 382 shall be dismissed unless the appellant or his pleader has had a 
reasonable opportunity of being hear d in support of the same;  
(b) no appeal presented under section 383 shall be dismissed except after giving the appellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in support of the same, unless the Appellate Court considers that the appeal is 
frivolous or th at the production of the accused in custody before the Court would involve such inconvenience as 
would be disproportionate in the circumstances of the case;  
 (c) no appeal presented under section 383 shall be dismissed summarily until the period allowed fo r 
preferring such appeal has expired.  
(2) Before dismissing an appeal under this section, the Court may call for the record of the case.  
(3) Where the Appellate Court dismissing an appeal under this section is a Court of Session or of the Chief 
Judicial Ma gistrate, it shall record its reasons for doing so.  
(4) Where an appeal presented under section 383 has been dismissed summarily under this section and the 
Appellate Court finds that another petition of appeal duly presented under section 382 on behalf of  the same 
appellant has not been considered by it, that Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 393, if 
satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of justice so to do, hear and dispose of such appeal in accordance with 
law. 
385. Proce dure for hearing appeals not dismissed summarily. —(1) If the Appellate Court does not dismiss 
the appeal summarily, it shall cause notice of the time and place at which such appeal will be heard to be given — 
(i) to the appellant or his pleader;  
(ii) to su ch officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf;  
(iii) if the appeal is from a judgment of conviction in a case instituted upon complaint, to the complainant;  
(iv) if the appeal is under section 377 or section 378, to the accused, and shall a lso furnish such officer, 
complainant and accused with a copy of the grounds of appeal.  
(2) The Appellate Court shall then send for the record of the case, if such record is not already available in that 
Court, and hear the parties:  
Provided that if the ap peal is only as to the extent or the legality of the sentence, the Court may dispose of the 
appeal without sending for the record.  
(3) Where the only ground for appeal from a conviction is the alleged severity of the sentence, the appellant 
shall not, exce pt with the leave of the Court, urge or be heard in support of any other ground.  
386. Powers of the Appellate Court. —After perusing such record and hearing the appellant or his pleader, if 
he appears, and the Public Prosecutor if he appears, and in case of  an appeal under section 377 or section 378, the 
accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering, 
dismiss the appeal, or may — 
(a) in an appeal from an order or acquittal, reverse such orde r and direct that further inquiry be made, or 
that the accused be re -tried or committed for  trial, as the case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on 
him according to law;  
(b) in an appeal from a conviction —  
(i) reverse the finding and sentence a nd acquit or discharge the accused, or order him to be re -tried by a 
Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such Appellate Court or committed for trial, or  184 
 (ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or  
(iii) with or without altering the fin ding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of the 
sentence, but not so as to enhance the same — 
(c) in an appeal for enhancement of sentence — 
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused or order him to be re -tried by a 
Court competent to try the offence, or  
(ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence , or 
 (iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or, the nature and extent, of the 
sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the s ame;  
(d) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse such order;  
(e) make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that may be just or proper:  
Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has had an opportunity of showing cause 
against such enhancement:  
Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater punishment for the offence which in its 
opinion the accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for that offence by the Court passing t he order or 
sentence under appeal.  
387. Judgments of Subordinate Appellate Court. —The rules contained in Chapter XXVII as to the judgment 
of a Criminal Court of original jurisdiction shall apply, so far as may be practicable, to the judgment in appeal of a  
Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate:  
Provided that, unless the Appellate Court otherwise directs, the accused shall not be brought up, or required to 
attend, to hear  judgment delivered.  
388. Order of High Court on appeal to be certified to lowe r Court. —(1) Whenever a case is decided on 
appeal by the High Court under this Chapter, it shall certify its judgment or order to the Court by which the finding, 
sentence or order appealed against was recorded or passed and if such Court is that of a Judic ial Magistrate other 
than the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent through the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, and if such Court is that of an Executive Magistrate, the High Court’s judgment or order shall be sent 
through the District Magistrate.  
(2) The Court to which the High Court certifies its judgment or order shall thereupon make such orders as are 
conformable to the judgment or order of the High Court; and if necessary, the record shall be amended in 
accordance there with.  
389. Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of appellant on bail. —(1) Pending any appeal by a 
convicted person, the Appellate Court may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the 
sentence or order appeal ed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be relea sed on bail, or on 
his own bond:  
1[Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on bail or on his own bond a convicted person who is 
convicted of an offence punishabl e with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten 
years, shall give opportunity to the Public Prosecutor for showing cause in writing against such release:  
Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is relea sed on bail it shall be open to the Public 
Prosecutor to file an application for the cancellation of the bail.]  
(2) The power conferred by this section on a Appellate Court may be exercised also by the High Court in the 
case of an appeal by a convicted per son to a  Court subordinate thereto.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 33 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  185 
 (3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is convicted that he intends to present an appeal, 
the Court shall, — 
(i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceed ing three years, or  
(ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is a bailable one, and he is on bail,  
order that the convicted person be released on bail, unless there are special reasons for refusing bail, for such period as 
will affor d sufficient time to present the appeal and obtain the orders of the Appellate Court under sub -section (1); and 
the sentence of imprisonment shall, so long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to be suspended.  
(4) When the appellant is ultimately senten ced to imprisonment for a term or to imprisonment for life, the time 
during which he is so released shall be excluded in computing the term for which he is so sentenced.  
390. Arrest of accused in  appeal from acquittal. —When an appeal is presented under sec tion 378, the High 
Court may issue a warrant directing that the accused be arrested and brought before it or any Subordinate Court, and 
the Court before which he is brought may commit him to prison pending the disposal of the appeal or admit him to 
bail. 
391. Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken. —(1) In dealing with any appeal 
under this Chapter, the Appellate Court, if it thinks additional evidence to be necessary, shall record its reasons and 
may either take such evidence its elf, or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate  or, when the Appellate Court is a High 
Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate.  
(2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court of Session or the Magistrate, it or he shall certify such 
evidence to  the Appellate Court, and such Court shall thereupon proceed to dispose of the appeal.  
(3) The accused or his pleader shall have the right to be present when the additional evidence is taken.  
(4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be subject t o the provisions of Chapter XXIII, as if it were an 
inquiry.  
392. Procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally divided. —When an appeal under this Chapter 
is heard by a High Court before a Bench of Judges and they are divided in opinion, the appeal , with their opinions, 
shall be laid before another Judge of that Court, and that Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver his 
opinion, and the judgment or order shall follow that opinion:  
Provided that if one of the Judges constituting th e Bench, or, where the appeal is laid before another Judge 
under this section, that Judge, so requires, the appeal shall be re -heard and decided by a larger Bench of Judges.  
393. Finality of judgments and orders on appeal. —Judgments and orders passed by an  Appellate Court upon 
an appeal shall be final,  except in the cases provided for in section 377, section 378, sub -section (4) of section 384 
or Chapter XXX:  
Provided that notwithstanding the final  disposal of an appeal against conviction in any case, the A ppellate Court 
may hear and dispose of, on the merits, — 
(a) an appeal against acquittal under section 378, arising out of the same case, or  
(b) an appeal for the enhancement of sentence under section 377, arising out of the same  case.  
394. Abatement of app eals.—(1) Every other appeal under section 377 or section 378 shall finally abate on the 
death of the accused.  
(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an appeal from a sentence of fine ) shall finally abate on the 
death of the appellant:  
Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction and sentence of death or of imprisonment, and the 
appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may, within thirty days of the death of the 
appellant, apply to the Appellate Court for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, the appeal shall not 
abate.  186 
 Explanation .—In this section, “near relative ” means a  parent, spouse, lineal descendant, brother or sister.  
CHAPTER XXX  
REFERENCE AND REVISION  
395. Reference to High Co urt.—(1) Where any Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a 
question as to the validity of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained  in an  Act, Ordinance 
or Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for t he disposal of the case, and is of opinion that such Act, 
Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative , but has not been so declared by the High Court to 
which that Court is Subordinate or  by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case setting out its opinion and the 
reasons therefor, and refer the same for the decision of the High Court.  
Explanation. —In this section, “Regulation ” means any Regulation as defined in the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897), or in the General Clauses Act  of a State.  
(2) A Court of Session or a  Metropolitan Magistrate may, if it or  he thinks fit in any case pending before it or 
him to which the provisions of sub -section (1) do not apply, refer for the decision of the High Court any question of 
law arising in the hearing of such case.  
(3) Any Court making a  reference to the High Court under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) may, pending the 
decision of the High Court thereon, either commit the accused to jail or release him on bail to appear when called 
upon. 
396. Disposal of case according to decision of High Court. —(1) When a question has been so referred, the 
High Court shall pass such order thereon as it thinks fit,  and shall cause a copy of such order to be sent to the Court 
by which the reference was m ade, which shall dispose of the case conformably to the said order.  
(2) The High Court may direct by whom the costs of such reference shall be paid.  
397. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision. —(1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call 
for and examine the record of any proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local 
jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself; to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, 
sentence  or order, recor ded or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, 
when calling, for such record, direct that the execution of any sentence or  order be suspended, and if the accused is 
in confinement that he be released on bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the record.  
Explanation. —All Magistrates, whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising original or appellate 
jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this sub -section and of              
section 398.  
(2) The powers of revision conferred by sub -section (1) shall not be exercised in relation to any interlocutory 
order passed in any appeal,  inquiry, trial or other proceeding.  
(3) If an application under this secti on has been made by any person either to the High Court or to the Sessions 
Judge, no further application by the same person shall be entertained by the other of them.  
398. Power to order inquiry. —On examining any record under section 397 or otherwise, the High Court or the 
Sessions Judge may direct the Chief Judicial Magistrate by himself or by any of the Magistrates subordinate to him 
to make, and the Chief Judic ial Magistrate may himself make  or direct any subordinate Magistrate to make, further 
inquiry i nto any complaint which has been dismissed under section 203 or sub -section (4) of section 204, or into the 
case of any person accused of an offence who has been discharged:  
Provided that no Court shall make any direction under this section for inquiry int o the case of any person who 
has been discharged unless such person has had an opportunity of showing cause why such direction should not be 
made.  
399. Sessions Judge's powers of revision. —(1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been 187 
 called for by himself, the Sessions Judge may exercise all or any of the powers which may be exercised by the High 
Court under sub -section (1) of section 401.  
(2) Where any proceeding by way of revision is commenced before a Sessions Judge under sub -section (1), the 
provisions of sub -sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 401 shall, so far as may be, apply to such proceeding and 
references in the said sub -sections to the High Court shall be construed as references to the Sessions Judge.  
(3) Where any applica tion for revision is made by or on behalf of any person before the Sessions Judge, the 
decision of the Sessions Judge thereon in relation to such person shall be final and no further proceeding by way of 
revision at the instance of such person shall be ent ertained by the High Court or any other Court.  
400. Power of Additional Sessions Judge. —An Additional Sessions Judge shall have and may exercise all the 
powers of a Sessions Judge under this Chapter in respect of any case which may be transferred to him by  or under 
any general or special order of the Sessions Judge.  
401. High Court's powers of revision. —(1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called 
for by itself or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its di scretion, exercise any of the 
powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by sections 386, 389, 390 and 391 or on a Court of Session by section 307, 
and, when the Judges composing the Court of Revision are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed o f 
in the manner provided by section 392.  
(2)  No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other person unless he has had 
an opportunity of being heard either personally or by pleader in his own defence.  
 (3) Nothing in this  section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one 
conviction.  
(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal is brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be 
entertained at the instance of the party who could have appealed.  
(5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an application for revision has been made to the High Court by 
any person and the High Court is satisfied that such application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal 
lies th ereto and that it is necessary in the interests of Justice so to do, the High Court may treat the application for 
revision as a petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly.  
402. Power of High Court to withdraw or transfer revision cases. —(1) When ever one or more persons 
convicted at the same trial makes or make application to a High Court for revision and any  other person  convicted at 
the same trial makes an  application to the Sessions Judge for revision, the High Court shall decide, having reg ard to the 
general convenience  of the  parties and the importance of the questions involved, which of the two Courts  should  
finally dispose of the applications for revision and when the High Court decides that all the applications for revision 
should be  disposed of by  itself, the High Court shall direct that the applications for revision  pending before the  
Sessions Judge be transferred to itself and where the High Court decides that it is not necessary for it to dispose of the 
applications for revisio n, it shall direct that the applications for revision made to it be transferred to the Sessions Judge.  
(2) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the High Court, that Court shall deal with the same 
as if it were an application duly made be fore itself.  
(3) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the Sessions Judge, that Judge shall deal with the 
same as if it were an application duly made before himself.  
(4) Where an application for revision is transferred by the High Court t o the Sessions Judge, no further 
application for revision shall lie to the High Court or to any other Court at the instance of the person or persons 
whose application s for revision have been disposed of by the Sessions Judge.  
403. Option of Court to hear p arties. —Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Code, no party has any 
right to be heard either personally or by pleader before any Court exercising its powers of revision; but the Court 
may, if it thinks fit,  when exercising such powers, hear any par ty either personally or by pleader.  188 
 404. Statement by Metropolitan Magistrate of ground s of his decision to be considered by High Court. —
When the record of any trial held by a Metropolitan Magistrate is called for by the High Court or Court of Session 
unde r section 397, the Magistrate may submit with the record a statement setting forth the grounds of his decision or 
order and any facts which he thinks material to the issue, and that Court shall consider such statement before 
overruling or setting aside the  said decision or order.  
405. High Court's order to be certified to lower Court. —When a case is revised under this Chapter by the 
High Court or a Sessions Judge, it or he shall, in the manner provided by section 388, certify its decision or order to 
the Co urt by which the finding, sentence or order revised was recorded or passed, and the Court to which the 
decision or order is so certified shall thereupon  make such orders as are conformable to the decision so certified, 
and, if necessary, the record shall be amended in accordance therewith.  
CHAPTER XXXI  
TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES  
406. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals. —(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the 
Supreme Court that an order under this section is expedient for the ends of just ice, it may direct that any particular 
case or appeal be transferred from one High Court to another High Court or from a Criminal Court subordinate to 
one High Court to another Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction subordinate to another High Co urt. 
 (2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the application of the Attorney -General of India or 
of a party interested, and every such application shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is 
the Attorney -General of India or the Advocate -General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.  
(3) Where any application for the exercise of the powers conferred by this section is dismissed, the Supreme 
Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivo lous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of 
compensation to any person who has opposed the application such sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it may 
consider appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
407. Power of High Court to trans fer cases and appeals. —(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the High 
Court — 
(a) that a fair and impartial inquiry or trial cannot be had in any Criminal Court subordinate thereto, or  
(b) that some question of law of unusual difficulty is likely to arise, o r 
(c) that an order under this section is required by any provision of this Code, or will tend to the general 
convenience of the parties or witnesses, or is expedient for the ends of justice,  
it may order — 
(i) that any offence be inquired into or tried by any Court not qualified under sections 177 to 185 (both 
inclusive), but in other respects competent to inquire into or try such offence;  
(ii) that any particular case or appeal, or class of cases or appeals, be transferred from a Criminal Court 
subordinate  to its authority to any other such Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction;  
(iii) that any particular case be committed for trial to a Court of Session; or  
(iv) that any particular case or appeal be transferred to and tried before itself.  
(2) The High Court may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the application of a party interested, or 
on its own initiative:  
Provided that no application shall lie to the High Court for transferring a case from one Criminal Court to 189 
 another Criminal  Court in the same sessions division, unless an application for such transfer has been made to the 
Sessions Judge and rejected by him.  
(3) Every application for an order under sub -section (1) shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the 
applicant is the Advocate -General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.  
(4) When such application is made by an accused person, the High Court may direct him to execute                    
a bond, with or without sureties, for the payment of any com pensation which the High Court may award under              
sub-section (7). 
(5) Every accused person making such application shall give to the Public Prosecutor notice in writing of the 
application, together with a copy of the grounds on which it is made;  and no order shall be made on the merits of the 
applications unless at least twenty -four hours have elapsed between the giving of such notice and the hearing of the 
application.  
 (6) Where the application is for the transfer of a case or appeal from any S ubordinate Court, the High Court 
may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the interest of Justice, order that, pending the disposal of the 
application the proceedings in the Subordinate Court shall be stayed, on such terms as the High Court  may think fit 
to impose:  
Provided that such stay shall n ot affect the Subordinate Court’ s power of remand under section 309.  
 (7) Where an application for an order under sub -section (1) is dismissed, the High Court may, if it is of opinion 
that the applic ation was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person 
who has opposed the application such sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it may consider proper in the 
circumstances of the case.  
(8) When the High Court  orders under sub -section (1) that a case be transferred from any Court for trial before 
itself, it shall observe in such trial the same procedure which that Court would have observed if the case had not 
been so transferred.  
(9) Nothing in this section sha ll be deemed to affect any order of Government under section 197.  
408. Power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals. —(1) Whenever it is made to appear to a 
Sessions Judge that an order under this sub -section is expedient for the ends of justice, h e may order that any 
particular case be transferred from one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in his sessions division.  
(2) The Sessions Judge may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the application of a party 
interested, or on his own initiative.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (9) of section 407 shall apply in relation to an 
application to the Sessions Judge for an order under sub -section (1) as they apply in relation to an application to the 
High Cou rt for an order under sub -section (1) of section 407 , except that sub -section (7) of that section shall so 
apply as if for the words “one thousand rupees ” occurring therein, the words “two hundred and fifty rupees ” were 
substituted.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Amendment of section 408.  —In section 408 of the principal Act, for the words “any other Magistrate ”, the 
words “other Magistrate of the first class ”, and for the words “any Magistrate ” the words “a Magistrate of the first 
class ”, shall be substituted.  
[Vide Kerala Act 5 of 1957, s. 3] 
409. Withdrawal of cases and appeals by  Session Judge. —(1) A Sessions Judge may withdraw any case or 
appeal from, or recall any case or appeal which he has made over to, any Assistant Sessions Judge or Chief Judicial 
Magistr ate subordinate to him.  190 
 (2) At any time before the trial of the case or the hearing of the appeal has commenced before the Additional 
Sessions Judge, a Sessions Judge may recall any case or appeal which he has made over to any Additional Sessions 
Judge.  
(3) Where a Sessions Judge withdraws or recalls case or appeal under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), he may 
either try the case in his own Court or hear the appeal himself, or make it over in accordance with the provisions of 
this Code to another Court f or trial or hearing, as the case may be.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Substitution of new section for section 409.  —For section 409 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely: — 
409. Appeals to Court of Section how heard. —An appeal to the Court of Session or Sessions Judge shall 
be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional Sessions Judge:  
Provided that an Additional Sessions Judge shall hear only such appeals as the State Government may, by 
general or special order, direct or a s the Sessions Judge of the division may make over to him.  
[Vide Kerala Act 5 of 1957, s. 4.]  
410. Withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrate. —(1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may withdraw any case 
from, or recall any case which he has made over to, any M agistrate subordinate to him, and may inquire into or try 
such case himself, or refer it for inquiry or trial to any other such Magistrate competent to inquire into or try the 
same.  
(2) Any Judicial Magistrate may recall any case made over by him under sub -section (2) of section 192 to any 
other Magistrate and may inquire into or try such case s himself.  
411. Making over or withdrawal of cases by Executive Magistrates. —Any District Magistrate or                   
Sub- Divisional Magistrate may — 
(a) make over , for disposal, any proceeding which has been started before him, to any Magistrate 
subordinate to him;  
(b) withdraw any case from, or recall any  case which he has made over to,  any Magistrate subordinate to 
him, and dispose of such proceeding himself  or refer it for disposal to any other Magistrate.  
412. Reasons to be recorded. —A Sessions Judge or Magistrate making an order under section 408, section 
409, section 410 or section 411 shall record his reasons for making it.  
CHAPTER XXXII  
EXECUTION, SUSPENSIO N, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES  
A.—Death Sentences  
413. Execution of order passed under section 368. —When in a case submitted to the High Court for the 
confirmation of a sentence of death, the Court of Session receives the order of confirmation o r other order of the 
High Court thereon, it shall cause such order to be carried into effect by issuing a warrant or taking such other steps 
as may be necessary.  
414. Execution of sentence of death passed by High Court. —When a sentence of death is passed b y the High 
Court in appeal or in revision, the Court of Session shall, on receiving the order of the High Court, cause the 
sentence to be carried into effect by issuing a warrant.  
415. Postponement of execution of sentence of death in case of appeal to Sup reme Court. —(1) Where a 191 
 person  is sentenced to death by the High Court and an appeal from its judgment lies to the Supreme Court under 
sub-clause (a) or sub -clause (b) of clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the 
executi on of the sentence to be postponed until the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired, or if, an 
appeal is preferred within that period, until such appeal is disposed of.  
(2) Where a  sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the person sentenced makes an 
application to the High Court for the grant of a certificate under article 132 or under sub -clause (c) of clause (1) of 
article 134 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postpo ned until such 
application is disposed of by the High Court, or if a certificate is granted on such application, until the period 
allowed for preferring an appeal to the Supreme Court on such certificate has expired.  
(3) Where a sentence of death is passed  or confirmed by the High Court, and the High Court is satisfied that the 
person sentenced intends to present a petition to the Supreme Court for the grant of special leave to appeal under 
article 136 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the exe cution of the sentence to be postponed for such 
period as it considers sufficient to enable him to present such petition.  
416. Postponement of capital sentence on pregnant woman. —If a woman sentenced to death is found to be 
pregnant, the High Court shall 1[****] , commute the sentence to imprisonment for life.  
B.—Imprisonment  
417. Power to appoint place of imprisonment. —(1) Except when otherwise provided by any law for the time 
being in force, the State Government may direct in what place any person liable t o be imprisoned or committed to 
custody under this Code shall be confined.  
(2) If any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to custody under this Code is in confinement in a civil 
jail, the Court or Magistrate ordering the imprisonment or committal m ay direct that the person be removed to a 
criminal jail.  
 (3) When a person is removed to a criminal jail under sub -section (2), he shall, on being released therefrom, be 
sent back to the civil jail, unless either — 
(a) three years have elapsed since he was  removed to the criminal jail, in which case he shall be deemed to 
have been released from the civil jail under section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or 
section 23 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), as the case may b e; or 
(b) the Court which ordered his imprisonment in the civil jail has certified to the officer in charge of the 
criminal jail that he is entitled to be released under section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
or under section 23 of th e Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), as the case may be.   
418. Execution of sentence of imprisonment. —(1) Where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment for life or 
to imprisonment for a term in cases other than those provided for by section 413,  the Court passing the sentence 
shall forthwith forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which he is, or is to be, confined, and, unless the 
accused is already confined in such jail or other place, shall forward him to such jail or other place, with  the warrant:  
Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment till the rising of the Court, it shall not be 
necessary to prepare or forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may be confined in such place as the Court may 
direct.  
(2) Where t he accused is not present in Court when he is sentenced to such imprisonment as is mentioned in 
sub-section (1), the Court shall issue a warrant for his arrest for the purpose of forwarding him to the jail or other 
place in which he is to be confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence on the date of his arrest.  
419. Direction of warrant for execution. —Every warrant for the execution of a sentence of imprisonment 
shall be directed to the officer  in charge of the jail or other place in which the p risoner is, or is to be, confined.  
                                                 
1. Certain words omitted by Act 5 of 2009, s. 30 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  192 
 420. Warrant with whom to be lodged. —When the prisoner is to be confined in a jail, the warrant shall be 
lodged with the jailor.  
C.—Levy of fine  
421. Warrant for levy  of fine. —(1) When an offender has been sentenced to pa y a fine, the Court passing the 
sentence may take action for the recovery of the fine in either or both of the following ways, that is to say, it may — 
(a) issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by attachment and sale of any movable property belonging t o 
the offender;  
(b) issue a warrant to the Collector of the district, authorising him to realise the amount as  arrears of land 
revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both, of the defaulter:  
Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default  of payment of the fine,  the offender shall be imprisoned, and 
if such offender has undergone the whole of such imprisonment in default, no Court shall issue such warrant unless, 
for special reasons to be recorded in writing, it considers it necessary so t o do, or unless  it has made an order for the 
payment of expenses or compensation out of the fine under section 357.  
(2) The State Government may make rules regulating the manner in which warrants under clause (a) of                      
sub-section (1) are to be executed, and for the summary determination of any claims made by any person other than 
the offender in respect of any property attached in execution of such warrant.  
(3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the Collector under clause (b) of sub -section (1), the Collector shall 
realise the amount in accordance with the law relating to recovery of arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant were 
a certificate issued under such law:  
Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the  arrest or deten tion in prison of the offender.  
422. Effect of such warrant. —A warrant issued under clause (a) of sub -section (1) of section 421 by any Court 
may be executed within the local jurisdiction of such Court, and it shall authorise the attachment and sale of any  
such property outside such jurisdiction, when it is endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose local 
jurisdiction such property is found.  
423. Warrant for levy of fine issued by a Court in any territory to which this Code does not extend. —
Notwithsta nding anything contained in this Code or in any other law for the time being in force, when an offender 
has been sentenced to pay a fine by a  Criminal Court in any territory to which this Code does not extend and the 
Court passing the sentence issues a war rant to the Collector of a district in the territories to which  this Code extends, 
authorising him to realise the amount as if it were an arrear of land revenue, such warrant shall be deemed to be a 
warrant issued under clause (b) of sub -section (1) of sec tion 421 by a  Court in the territories to which this Code 
extends, and the provisions of sub -section (3) of the said section as to the execution of such warrant shall apply 
accordingly.  
424. Suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment. —(1) When an offender has been sentenced to 
fine only and to imprisonment in default of payment of the fine, and the fine is not paid forthwith, the Court may — 
(a) order that the fine shall be payable either in full on or before a date not more than thirty days from th e 
date of the order, or in two or three instalments, of which the first shall be payable on or before a date not more 
than thirty days from the date of the order and the other or others at an interval or at intervals, as the case may 
be, of not more than t hirty days;  
(b) suspend the execution of the sentence of imprisonment and release the offender, on the execution by the 
offender of a bond, with or without sureties, as the Court thinks fit, conditioned for his appearance before the 
Court on the date or da tes on or before which payment of the fine or the instalments thereof, as the case may be, 
is to be made; and if the amount of the fine or of any instalment, as the case may be, is not realised on or before 
the latest date on which it is payable under the order, the Court may direct the sentence of imprisonment to be 
carried into execution at once.  193 
 (2) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall be applicable also in any case in which an order for the payment of 
money has been made on non -recovery of which impr isonment may be awarded and the money is not paid 
forthwith; and, if the person against whom the order has been made, on being required to enter into a bond such as is 
referred to in that sub -section, fails to do so, the Court may at once pass sentence of imprisonment.  
D.—General provisions regarding execution  
425. Who may issue warrant. —Every warrant for the execution of a sentence may be issued either by the 
Judge or Magistrate who passed the sentence, or by his successor -in-office.  
426. Sentence  on escap ed convict when to take effect. —(1) When a sentence of death, imprisonment for life 
or fine is passed under this Code on an escaped convict, such sentence shall, subject to the provisions hereinbefore 
contained, take effect immediately.  
(2) When a sentence  of imprisonment for a term is passed under this Code on an escaped convict ,— 
(a) if such sentence is severer in kind than the sentence which such convict was undergoing when he 
escaped, the new sentence shall take effect immediately;  
(b) if such sentence is not severer in kind than the sentence which such convict was undergoing when he 
escaped, the new sentence shall take effect after he has suffered imprisonment for a further period equal to that 
which, at the time of his escape, remained unexpired of his  former sentence.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -section (2), a sentence of rigorous imprisonment shall be deemed to be severer in 
kind than a sentence of simple imprisonment.  
427. Sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence. —(1) When a person already undergoing a 
sentence of imprisonment is sentenced on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment or imprisonment for life, such 
imprisonment or imprisonment for life shall commence at the expiration of the imprisonment to which he has been 
previously sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous 
sentence:  
Provided that where a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment by an order under section 122 in default 
of furnishing security is, whi lst undergoing such sentence, sentenced to imprisonment for an offence committed 
prior to the making of such order, the latter sentence shall commence immediately.  
(2) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life is sentenced on a s ubsequent 
conviction to imprisonment for a term or imprisonment for life, the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with 
such previous sentence.  
428. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment. — 
Whe re an accused person has, on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term, 1[, not being imprisonment 
in default of payment of fine], the period of detention, if any, undergone by him during the  investigation, inquiry or 
trial of the same case an d before the date of such conviction, shall be set off against the term of imprisonment 
imposed on him on such conviction, and the liability of such person to undergo imprisonment on such conviction 
shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term  of imprisonment imposed on him:  
2[Provided that in cases referred to in section 433A, such period of detention shall be set off against the period 
of fourteen years referred to in that section.]  
429. Saving. —(1) Nothing in section 426 or section 427 shall  be held to excuse any person from any part of the 
punishment to which he is liable upon his former or subsequent conviction.  
(2) When an award of imprisonment in default of payment of a fine is annexed to a substantive sentence of 
                                                 
1. Ins. by A ct 45 of 1978, s. 31  (w.e.f.18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 34 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  194 
 imprisonment and the per son undergoing the sentence is after its execution to undergo a  further substantive sentence 
or further substantive sentences of imprisonment, effect shall not be given to the award of imprisonment in default 
of payment of the fine until the person has und ergone the further sentence or sentences.  
430. Return of warrant on execution of sentence. —When a sentence has been fully executed, the officer 
executing it shall return the warrant to the Court from which it is issued, with an endorsement under his hand 
certifying the manner  in which the sentence has been executed.  
431. Money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine. —Any money (other than a fine) payable by virtue of 
any order made under this Code, and the method of recovery of which is not otherwise expre ssly provided for, shall 
be recoverable as if it were a fine:  
Provided that section 421 shall, in its application to an order under section 359, by virtue of this section, be 
construed as if in the proviso to sub -section (1) of section 421, after the words  and figures “under section 357 ”, the 
words and figures “or an order for payment of costs under section 359 ” had been inserted.  
E.—Suspension, remission and commutation of sentences  
432. Power to suspend or remit sentences. —(1) When any person has been sen tenced to punishment for an 
offence, the appropriate Government may, at any time, without conditions or upon any conditions which the person 
sentenced accepts, suspend the execution of his sentence or remit the whole or any part of the punishment to which 
he has been sentenced.  
(2) Whenever an application is made to the appropriate Government for the suspension or remission of a  
sentence, the appropriate Government may require the presiding Judge of the Court before or by which the 
conviction was had or con firmed, to state his opinion as to whether the application should be granted or refused, 
together with his reasons for such opinion and also to forward with the statement of such opinion a certified copy of 
the record of the trial or of such record thereof  as exists.  
(3) If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended or remitted is, in the opinion of the appropriate 
Government, not fulfilled, the appropriate Government may cancel the suspension or remission, and thereupon the 
person in whose favour  the sentence has been suspended or remitted may, if at large, be arrested by any police 
officer, without warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence.  
(4) The condition on which a sentence is suspended or remitted under this secti on may be one to be fulfilled by 
the person in whose favour the sentence is suspended or remitted, or one independent of his will.  
(5) The appropriate Government may, by general rules or special orders, give directions as to the suspension of 
sentences and  the conditions on which petitions should be presented and dealt with:  
Provided that in the case of any sentence (other than a sentence of fine) passed on a male person above the age 
of eighteen years, no such petition by the person sentenced or by any oth er person on his behalf shall be entertained, 
unless the person sentenced is in jail, and — 
(a) where such petition is made by the person sentenced, it is presented through the officer in charge of the 
jail; or  
(b) where such petition is made by any other p erson, it contains a declaration that the person sentenced is in 
jail. 
(6) The provisions of the above sub -sections shall also apply to any order passed by a Criminal Court under any 
section of this Code or of any other law, which restricts the liberty of any person or imposes any liability upon him 
or his property.  
(7) In this section and in section 433, the expression “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against, or the order referred to in sub -section (6) is passed 195 
 under, any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government;  
(b) in other cases, the Government of the State within which the offender is sentenced or the said order is 
passed.  
433. Power to commute sentence. —The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the person 
sentenced, commute — 
(a) a sentence of death, for any other punishment provided by the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) a sentence of imprisonment for life, for imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years or for 
fine; 
(c) a sentence of rigorous imprisonment, for simple imprisonment for any term to which that person might 
have been sentenced, or for fine;  
(d) a sentence of simple imprisonment, for fine.  
1[433A. Restriction  on powers of remission or commutation in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 432, where a sentence of imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of a person for an 
offence for which death is one of the punishments provided by law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a 
person has been commuted under section 433 into one of imprisonment for life, such person shall not be released 
from prison unless he had served at least fourteen years of imprisonment.]  
434. Concurrent power of Central Government in case of death sentences. —The powers conferred by 
sections 432 and 433 upon the State Government may, in the case of sentences of death, also be exercised by the 
Central Government.  
435. State Government to act after  consultation wi th Central Government in certain cases. —(1) The 
powers conferred by sections 432 and 433 upon the State Government to remit or commute a sentence, in any case 
where the sentence is for an offence — 
(a) which was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Esta blishment constituted under the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by any other agency empowered to make investigation into an 
offence under any Central Act other than this Code, or  
(b) which involved the misappropriation or dest ruction of, or damage to, any property belonging to the 
Central Government, or  
(c) which was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while acting or purporting 
to act in the discharge of his official duty,  
shall not be exercised by t he State Government except after consultation with the Central Government.  
(2) No order of suspension, remission or commutation of sentences passed by the State Government in relation 
to a person, who has been convicted of offences, some of which relate to  matters to which the executive power of 
the Union extends, and who has been sentenced to separate terms of imprisonment which are to run concurrently, 
shall have effect unless an order for the suspension, remission or commutation, as the case may be, of s uch 
sentences has also been made by the Central Government in relation to the offences committed by such person with 
regard to matters to which the executive power of the Union extends.  
 
 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Ac t 45 of 1978, s. 32   (w.e.f.18 -12-1978).  196 
 CHAPTER XXXIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS  
436. In what cases ba il to be taken. —(1) When any person other than a  person accused of a non -bailable 
offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or is brought 
before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the  custody of such officer or at any stage of the proceeding 
before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail:  
Provided that such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit,  1[may, and shall, if such person is indigent and is 
unable to fur nish surety, instead of taking bail]  from such person, discharge him on his executing a bond without 
sureties for his app earance as hereinafter provided.  
2[Explanation .—Where a person is unable to give bail within a week of the date of his arrest, it shall  be a 
sufficient ground for the officer or the Court to presume that he is an indigent person for the purposes of this 
proviso .] 
Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of sub -section (3) of 
section 116 3[or section 446A].  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where a person has failed to comply with the 
conditions of the bail -bond as regards the time and place of attendance, the Court may refuse to release him on bail, 
when on a subsequent  occasion in the same case he appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such 
refusal shall be without prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any person bound by such bond to pay the 
penalty thereof under section 446.  
STATE AMENDM ENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
 In section 436 of the said Code, in sub -section (1), in the first proviso, for the word “discharge” the 
word “release” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 10] 
4[436A. Maximum period for which an undertrial prison er can be detained .—Where a person has, during 
the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under this Code of an offence under any law (not being an offence for 
which the punishment of death has been specified as one of the punishments under that law) un dergone detention for 
a period extending up to one -half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offence under that law, 
he shall be released by the Court on his personal bond with or without sureties:  
Provided that the Court may, after hea ring the Public Prosecutor and for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, 
order the continued detention of such person for a period longer than one -half of the said period or release him on 
bail instead of the personal bond with or without sureties:  
Prov ided further that no such person shall in any case be detained during the period of investigation, inquiry or 
trial for more than the maximum period of imprisonment provided for the said offence under that law.  
Explanation .—In computing the period of deten tion under this section for granting bail, the period of detention 
passed due to delay in proceeding caused by the accused shall be excluded.]  
437. When bail may be taken in case of non -bailable offence. —5[(1) When any person accused of, or 
suspected of, t he commission of any non -bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in 
charge of a police station or appears or is brought before a Court other than the High Court or Court of session, he 
may be released on bail, but — 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 200 5, s. 35, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Ins. by  Act 25 of 2005 , s. 35, (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 4 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 36 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
5. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 5, for sub -sectio n (1) (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  197 
 (i) such p erson shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that he has been 
guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life;  
(ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is a cognizable offence and he h ad been previously 
convicted of an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more, 
or he had been previously convicted on two or more occasions of 1[a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for three y ears or more but not less than seven years :] 
Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) be released on bail if such 
person is under the age of sixteen years or is a woman or is sick or infirm:  
Provided further  that the Court may also direct that a person referred to in clause (ii) be released on bail if it is 
satisfied that it is just and proper so to do for any other special reason:  
Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person may be required for be ing identified by witnesses during 
investigation shall not be sufficient ground for refusing to grant bail if he is otherwise entitled to be released on bail 
and gives an undertaking that he shall comply with such directio ns as may be given by the Court: ] 
2[Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been committed by him is punishable with 
death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for seven years or more, be released on bail by the Court under this 
sub-section without giving an o pportunity of hearing to the Public Prosecutor.]  
(2) If it appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or trial, as the case may be, 
that there are not reasonable grounds for believing that the accused has committed a non -bailable offence, but that 
there are sufficient grounds for further inquiry into his guilt, 3[the accused shall, subject to the provisions of section 
446A and pending such inquiry, be released on bail], or, at the discretion of such officer or Court, on the execution 
by him of a bond without sureties for his appearance as hereinafter provided.  
(3) When a person accused or suspected of the commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment which 
may extend to seven years or more or of an offence under Chapt er VI, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or abatement of, or conspiracy or attempt to commit, any such offence, is released on bail 
under sub -section (1), 4[the Court shall impose the conditions, — 
(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond executed under this Chapter,  
(b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is accused, or suspected, 
of the commission of which he is suspected, and  
(c) that such pe rson shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any 
police officer or tamper with the evidence,  
and may als o impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it considers necessary.]  
(4) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), shall record in 
writing his or its 5[reasons or  special reasons] for s o doing.  
(5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), may, if it considers 
it necessary so to do, direct that such person be arrested and commit him to custody.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 37, for “a non -bailable and cognizable offence” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Ins. by  Act 25 of 2005 , s. 37 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 37, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
5. Subs. by Act  63 of 1980, s. 5,  for “reasons”  (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  198 
 (6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the  trial of a person accused of any non -bailable offence is not 
concluded within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed for taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if 
he is in custody during the whole of the said period, be released on bail  to the satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs.  
(7) If, at any time, after the conclusion of the trial of a person accused of a non -bailable offence and before 
judgment is delivered, t he Court is of opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not 
guilty of any such offence, it shall release the accused, if he is in custody, on the execution by him of a bond without 
sureties for his appearance to hear judg ment delivered .  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 437. —In section 437 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), after the fourth 
proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely: — 
“Provided also that no person shall, if the offe nce alleged to have been committed by him against 
woman is punishable with imprisonment for not less than seven years, be released on bail by the 
Court under this sub -section without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Public prosecutor”.  
[Vide Arunach al Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 22]  
1[437A.  Bail to require accused to appear before next appellate Court. —(1) Before conclusion of the trial 
and before disposal of the appeal, the Court trying the offence or the Appellate Court, as the case may be, shall  
require the accused to execute bail bonds with sureties, to appear before the higher Court as and when such Court 
issues notice in respect of any appeal or petition filed against the judgment of the respective Court and such bail 
bonds shall be in force for six months.  
(2) If such accused fails to appear, the bond stand forfeited and the procedure under section 446 shall apply.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
UTTAR PRADESH  
 Insertion of sections 438 in Act no. 2 of 1974 as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh .—In 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, after section 437 -A 
the following section shall be inserted, namely:  — 
“438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest. —(1) Where any person has reason 
to be lieve that he may be arrested on accusation or having committed a non -bailable offence, he may 
apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that in the event of 
such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration, inter alia, 
the following factors, namely: - 
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;  
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously undergone 
imprisonment on conviction by  a Court in respect of any cognizable offence;  
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and  
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant 
by having him so arrested;  
either reject the ap plication forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 31 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  199 
 Provided that where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed 
any interim order under this sub -section or has rejected the application for g rant of anticipatory bail, it 
shall be open to an officer in -charge of a police station to arrest, without warrant, the applicant on the 
basis of the accusation apprehended in such application.  
(2) Where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, considers it expedient to 
issue an interim order to grant anticipatory bail under sub -section ( 1), the Court shall indicate therein 
the date, on which the application for grant of anticipatory bail shall be finally heard for passing an 
order there on, as the Court may deem fit, and if the Court passes any order granting anticipatory bail, 
such order shall include inter alia the following conditions, namely: - 
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as  and 
when required;  
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise 
to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such 
facts to the Court or to any police officer ; 
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court; and  
(iv) such other conditions as may be imposed under sub -section ( 3) of section 437, as if the 
bail were granted under that section.  
Explanation :—The final ord er made on an application for direction under sub -section ( 1); shall 
not be construed as an interlocutory order for the purpose of this Code.  
(3) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub -section ( 1), it shall forthwith cause a notice 
being not les s than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the Public 
Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard when the application shall be finally hea rd by the Court.  
(4) On the date indicated in the interim order under sub -section ( 2), the Court shall hear the 
Public Prosecutor and the applicant and after due consideration of their contentions, it may either 
confirm, modify or cancel the interim order.  
(5) The High Court or the Court of Session, as the case may be, shall finally dispose of an 
application for grant of anticipatory bail under sub -section ( 1), within thirty days of the date of such 
application.  
(6) Provisions of this section shall not be a pplicable, -- 
(a) to the offences arising out of, -- 
(i) the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967;  
(ii) the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985;  
(iii) the Official Secret Act, 1923;  
(iv) the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti -Social Acti vities (Prevention) Act, 1986.  
(b) in the offences, in which death sentence can be awarded.  
(7) If an application under this section has been made by any person to the High Court, no 
application by the same person shall be entertained by the Court of Sessi on. 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh 4 of 2019, s. 2]  200 
 438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest .— (1) When any person 
has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having committed a non -
bailable offence, he may apply to the Hig h Court or the Court of Session for a direction under 
this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the event of such arrest, he shall be 
released on bail.  
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under subsect ion ( 1), it 
may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it 
may thinks fit, including — 
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a police 
officer as and when req uired;  
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, 
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him 
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;  
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous permission of 
the Court;  
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub -section ( 3) of section 437, as if 
the bail were granted under that section.  
(3) If such person is ther eafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police 
station on such accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the 
custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail, and if a Magistrate  taking 
cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should issue in the first instance against that 
person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court under           
sub-section ( 1). 
1[(4) Nothing in this section  shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person on 
accusation of having committed an offence under sub -section ( 3) of section 376 or section 
376AB or section 376DA or section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
 
STATE AMENDMENT S 
West Bengal. — 
To sub -section ( 1) of section 438 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added: — 
“Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not les s than seven years, no final order shall be made 
on such application without giving the State not less than seven days’ notice to present its case.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 47 of 1981, s. 3. ] 
West Bengal. — 
For sub -section ( 1) of section 438, of the principal Act the following sub -sections shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“(1) (a) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having 
committed a non -bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a d irection 
under this section that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail:  
Provided that the mere fact that a person has applied to the High Court or the Court of Session for a 
direction under this section shall not, in the absence of any order by that Court, be a bar to the 
apprehension of such person, or the detention of such person in custody, by an officer -in-charge of a 
police station.  
(b) The High Court or the Court of Session, as the case may be, shall dispose of an application for a  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 22 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  201 
 direction under this sub -section within thirty days of the date of such application:  
Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years,  no final order shall be made 
on such application without giving the State not less than seven days notice to present its case.  
(c) If any person is arrested and detained in custody by an officer -in-charge of a police station before 
the disposal of the app lication of such person for a direction under this sub -section, the release of such 
person on bail by a Court having juri sdiction, pending such disposal,  shall be subject to the provisions of 
section 437.  
(1A) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall have e ffect notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained elsewhere in this Act or in any judgment, decree or order of any Court, tribunal or other 
authority. ”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 25 of 1990, s. 3]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 438 .—In section 438 of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , to 
sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added, namely: — 
“Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of  not less than seven years, no final order shall be made 
on such application without giving the State notice to present its case.”:  
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1988, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Substitution of section 438 of Act 2 of 1974 .—For section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely: - 
“438. Direction for giant of bail to person apprehending arrest .—(1) When any person has 
reason to believe that he ma y be arrested on an accusation of having committed a non -bailable 
offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that 
in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail; and High Court may, after t aking into 
consideration, inter alia, the following factors: — 
(i) the nature and gravity or seriousness of the accusation as apprehended by the applicant;  
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has, on conviction by a 
Court previously undergone imprisonment for a term in respect of any cognizable offence;  
(iii) the likely object of the accusation to humiliate or malign the reputation of the applicant 
by having him so arrested, and  
(iv) the possibility of the applicant, if granted anticipatory bail, fleeing from justice, either 
reject the application forth with or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:  
Provided that where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed 
any inte rim order under this sub -section or has rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail, it 
shall be open to an off icer in charge of a police station to arrest, without warrant the applicant on the 
basis of the accusation apprehended in such applic ation.  
(2) Where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, considers it expedient to 
issue an interim order to grant anticipatory bail under sub -section ( 1), the Court shall indicate therein  
 
 202 
 the date, on which the application for grant  of, anticipatory bail shall be finally heard for passing on 
order thereon, as the Court may deem fit; and if the Court passes any order granting anticipatory bail, 
such order shall include inter alia  the following conditions, namely: - 
(i) that the applica nt shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as and 
when required;  
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise 
to any person acquainted with the facts of the accusation against him so as to dissuade him from 
disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;  
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court; and  
(iv) such other conditions as may be imposed under sub -section ( 3) of section 437 as if the 
bail was granted under that section.  
(3) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub -section ( 1), it shall forthwith cause a 
notice, being not less than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on th e 
Public Prosecutor and the Commissioner of Police, or as the case may be, the concerned 
Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard when the application shall be finally heard by the Court.  
(4) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be obligatory at the time of final 
hearing of the application and passing of final order by the Court, if on an application made to it by 
the Public Prosecutor, the Court considers such prese nce necessary in the interest of justice.  
(5) On the date indicated in the interim order under sub -section ( 2), the Court shall hear the 
Public Prosecutor and the applicant and after due consideration of their contentions, it may either 
confirm, modify or cancel the interim order made under sub -section ( 1).] 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 24 of 1993, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Section 438 of the said Code shall be omitted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 9]  
439. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regar ding bail. —(1) A High Court or Court of 
Session may direct, — 
(a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, and if the offence is of the 
nature specified in sub -section (3) of  section 437, may impose any condition which it c onsiders necessary for 
the purposes mentioned in that sub -section;  
(b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on bail be set aside or modified:  
Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person who is accused of an 
offence which is triable exclusively by the Court of Session or which, though not so triable, is punishable with 
imprisonment for life, give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor unless it is, for reas ons to be 
recorded in writing, of opinion that it is not practicable to give such notice.  
1[Provided further that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person 
who is accused of an offence triable under sub -section (3) of  section 376  or section 376AB  or section 
376DA  or section 376DB  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), give notice of the application for bail to 
the Public Prosecutor within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of such 
application .] 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 22 of 2018,  s. 23 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  203 
 1[(1A) The presence of the informant or any person authorised by him shall be obligatory at the time 
of hearing of the application for bail to the person under sub -section ( 3) of section 376  or section 
376AB  or section 376DA  or section DB  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
(2) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person who has been released on bail under this 
Chapter be arrested and commit him to custody.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam. — 
439-A. Power to grant bail .—(1) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in this Code, no person — 
(a) who, being accused or suspected of committing an offe nce under any of the following S ections, 
namely,  —Sections 120B, 121, 121A, 122, 123, 124A, 153A, 302, 303, 304, 307, 326, 333, 363, 364, 
365, 367, 368, 392, 394 , 395, 396, 399, 412, 431, 436, 449 and 450 o f the Indian Penal Code, 1860, 
Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Indian Explo sive Substances Act, 1908, and S ections 25,26, 27, 28, 29, 30 
and 31 of the Arms Act, 1959, is arrested or appears or is brought before a court;  or 
(b) who, having any reason to believe that he may be arrested on  an accusation of committing an 
offence as specified in clause ( a), has applied to the High Court or the Court of Sessions for a direction 
for his release on bail in the event of his  arrest,  shall be released on bail or  as the case may be, directed to 
be released on bail, except on one or more of the following grounds, namely:  — 
(i) that the Court including the High  Court or the Court of Session  for reasons to be recorded in 
writing i s satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that such person is not guilty of any 
offence specified in clause ( a); 
(ii) that such person is under the age of sixteen years or a woman or a sick or an infirm person;  
(iii) that the court includ ing the High Court or the Court of Sessions for reasons to be recorded in 
writing is satisfied that there are exceptional and sufficient grounds to release or direct the release of 
the accused on bail. ” 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 5 .] 
440. Amount of bond  and reduction thereof. —(1) The amount of every bond executed under this Chapter 
shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive.  
(2) The High Court or the Court of Session may direct that the bail required by a p olice officer or Magistrate be 
reduced.  
441. Bond of accused and sureties. —(1) Before any person is released on bail or released on his own bond, a 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018,  s. 23 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  204 
 bond for such sum of money as the police officer or Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient shall be ex ecuted by 
such person, and, when he is released on bail, by one or more sufficient sureties conditioned that such person shall 
attend at the time and place mentioned in the bond, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the 
police office r or Court, as the case may be.  
(2) Where any condition is imposed for the release of any person on bail, the bond shall also contain that 
condition.  
(3) If the case so requires, the bond shall also bind the person released on bail to appear when called up on at the 
High Court, Court of Session or other Court to answer the charge.  
(4) For the purpose of determining whether the sureties are fit or sufficient, the Court may accept affidavits in 
proof of the facts contained therein relating to the sufficiency o r fitness of the sureties, or, if it considers necessary, 
may either hold an enquiry itself or cause an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to the Court, as to such 
sufficiency or fitness.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 441 Central Act 2 of 1974. —In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) in section 441, in sub -section ( 1), the following words sh all 
be added at the end, namely . — 
“and for imposition of a fine not exceeding the amoun t prescribed in the surety bond, in case the surety 
fails to produce the accused on the date fixed by the court in grave/serious offences. ” 
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 17 of 2019, s. 2 ] 
1[441A. Declaration by sureties. —Every person standing surety to an accus ed person for his release on bail, 
shall make a declaration before the Court as to the number of persons to whom he has stood surety including the 
accused, giving therein all the relevant particulars.]  
442. Discharge from custody. —(1) As soon as the bond h as been executed, the person for whose appearance it 
has been executed shall be released; and, when he is in jail, the court admitting him to bail shall issue an order of 
release to the officer in charge of the jail, and such officer on receipt of the orde rs shall release him.  
(2) Nothing in this section, section 436 or section 437, shall be deemed to require the release of any person 
liable to be detained for some matter other than that in respect of which the bond was executed.  
443. Power to order suffici ent bail when that first taken is insufficient. —If, through mistake, fraud or 
otherwise, insufficient sureties have been accepted, or if they afterwards become insufficient, the Court may issue a 
warrant of arrest directing that the person released on bail  be brought before it and may order him to find sufficient 
sureties, and, on his failing so to do, may commit him to jail.  
444. Discharge of sureties. —(1) All or any sureties for the attendance and appearance of a person released on 
bail may at any time ap ply to a Magistrate to discharge the bond, either wholly or so far as relates to the applicants.  
(2) On such application being made, the Magistrate shall issue his warrant of arrest directing that the person so 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 39 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  205 
 released be brought before him.  
(3) On the ap pearance of such person pursuant to the warrant, or on his voluntary surrender, the Magistrate shall 
direct the bond to be discharged either wholly or so far as relates to the applicants, and shall call upon such person to 
find other sufficient sureties, a nd, if he fails to do so, may commit him to jail.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
West Bengal  
In section 444 of the Principal Act, —  
 (1) in sub -section ( 1) after the words “at any time”, the words, “on showing sufficient cause,” shall be 
inserted;  
(2) after sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be inserted: — 
“(1A) On such application being made, the Magistrate may either hold an inquiry himself, or cause 
an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to him, on the correctness of the reason shown, in 
the ap plication to discharge the bond as stated in sub -section ( 1)”; 
(3) for sub -section ( 2), the following sub -section shall be substituted: — 
“(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied, on enquiry made under sub -section (1A), that all or any of the 
sureties applying f or discharge may be discharged, he shall issue warrant of arrest directing that the 
person so released be brought before him. ” 
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 2003, s. 3]   
445. Deposit instead of recognizance. —When any person is required by any Court or office r to execute a bond 
with or without sureties, such Court or officer may, except in the case of a bond for good behaviour, permit him to 
deposit a sum of money or Government promissory notes to such amount as the Court or officer may fix in lieu of 
executin g such bond.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
West Bengal  
In section 445 of the principal Act, — 
(a) the words “with or without sureties” shall be omitted; and  
(b) for the word “permit”, the word “direct” shall be substituted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 2003, s. 4.]  
446. Procedure when bond has been forfeited. —(1) Where a bond under this Code is for appearance, or for 
production of property, before a Court and it is proved to the satisfaction of that Court, or of any Court to which the 
case has subsequently been transferr ed, that the bond has been forfeited,  
or where, in respect of any other bond under this Code, it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court by which the 
bond was taken, or of any Court to which the case has subsequently been transferred, or of the Court o f any 
Magistrate of the first class, that the bond has been forfeited,  
the Court shall record the grounds of such proof, and may call upon any person bound by such bond to pay the 
penalty thereof or to show cause why it should not be paid.  
Explanation. —A condition in a bond for appearance, or for production of property, before a Court shall be 
construed as including a condition for appearance, or as the case may be, for production of property, before any 
Court to which the case may subsequently be transferr ed. 
(2) If sufficient cause is not shown and the penalty is not paid, the Court may proceed to recover the same as if 206 
 such penalty were a fine imposed by it under this Code:  
1[Provided that where such penalty is not paid and cannot be recovered in the mann er aforesaid, the person so 
bound as surety shall be liable, by order of the Court ordering the recovery of the penalty, to imprisonment in civil 
jail for a term which may extend to six months.]  
(3) The Court may, 2[after rec ording its reasons for doing s o], remit any portion of the penalty mentioned and 
enforce payment in part only.  
(4) Where a surety to a bond dies before the bond is forfeited, his estate shall be discharged from all liability in 
respect of the bond.  
(5) Where any person who has furnishe d security under section 106 or section 117 or section 360 is convicted 
of an offence the commission of which constitutes a breach of the conditions of his bond, or of a bond executed in 
lieu of his bond under section 448, a certified copy of the judgment of the Court by which he was convicted of such 
offence may be used as evidence in proceedings under this section against his surety or sureties, and, if such 
certified copy is so used, the Court shall presume that such offence was committed by him unless t he contrary is 
proved.  
3[446A. Cancellation of bond and bail bond. —Without prejudice to the provisions of section 446, where a 
bond under this Code is for appearance of a person in a case and it is forfeited for breach of a condition, — 
(a) the bond execute d by such person as well as the bond, if any, executed by one or more of his sureties in 
that case shall stand cancelled; and  
(b) thereafter no such person shall be released only on his own bond in that case, if the Police Officer or the 
Court, as the case  may be, for appearance before whom the bond was executed, is  satisfied that there was no 
sufficient cause for the failure of the person bound by the bond to comply with its condition:  
Provided that subject to any other provisions of this Code he may be r eleased in that case upon the execution of 
a fresh personal bond for such sum of money and bond by one or more of such sureties as the Police Officer or the 
Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient.]  
447. Procedure in case of insolvency of death of sur ety or when a bond is forfeited. —When any surety to a 
bond under this Code becomes insolvent or dies, or when any bond is forfeited under the provisions of   section 446, 
the Court by whose order such bond was taken, or a Magistrate of the first class may order the person from whom 
such security was demanded to furnish fresh securities in accordance with the directions of the original order, and if 
such security is not furnished, such Court or Magistrate may proceed as if there had been a default in complyi ng 
with such original order.  
448. Bond required from minor. —When the person  required by any Court, or officer to execute a bond is a 
minor, such Court or officer may accept, in lieu thereof, a bond executed by a surety or sureties only.  
449. Appeal from or ders under section 446. —All orders passed under section 446 shall be appealable, — 
(i) in the case of an order made by a Magistrate, to the Sessions Judge;  
(ii) in the case of an order made by a Court of Session, to the Court to which an appeal lies from an  order 
made by such Court.  
450. Power to direct levy of amount due on certain recognizances. —The High Court or Court of Sessions 
may direct any Magistrate to levy the amount due on a bond for appearance or attendance at such High Court or 
Court of Session.  
 
                                                 
1. Added by Act 63 of 1980, s. 6 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 40, for “at its d iscretion” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 7  (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
 207 
 CHAPTER XXXIV  
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY  
451. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial in certain cases. —When any property is 
produced before any Criminal Court during any inquiry or trial, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for 
the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the inquiry or trial, and, if the property is subject to 
speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, the Court may, after recording such evidence as it 
thinks necessary, ord er it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “property ” includes — 
(a) property of any kind or document which is produced before the C ourt or which is in its custody;  
(b) any property regarding which an offence a ppears to have been committed or which appears to have 
been used for the commission of any offence.  
452. Order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial. —(1) When an inquiry or trial in any Criminal 
Court is concluded, the Court may make such order a s it thinks fit for the disposal, by destruction, confiscation or 
delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof or otherwise, of any property or document 
produced before it or in its custody, or regarding which any offence appears to  have been committed, or which has 
been used for the commission of any offence.  
(2) An order may be made under sub -section (1) for the delivery of any property to any person claiming to be 
entitled to the possession thereof, without any condition or on con dition that he executes a bond, with or without 
securities, to the satisfaction of the Court, engaging to restore such property to the Court if the order made under 
sub-section (1) is modified or set aside on appeal or revision.  
(3) A Court of Session may,  instead of itself making an order under sub -section (1), direct the property to be 
delivered to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, who shall thereupon deal with it in the manner provided in sections 457, 
458 and 459.  
(4) Except where the property is livestock  or is subject to speedy and natural decay, or where a bond has been 
executed in pursuance of sub -section (2), an order made under sub -section (1) shall not be carried out for two 
months, or when an appeal is presented, until such appeal has been disposed of. 
(5) In this section, the term “property ” includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence appears to 
have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under the control of any 
party, but also any proper ty into or for which the same may have  been converted or exchanged, and anything 
acquired by such  conversion or  exchange, whether immediately or otherwise.  
453. Payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused. —When any person is convicted of any 
offence which includes, or amounts to, theft or receiving stolen property, and it is proved that  any other person 
bought the stolen property from him without knowing  or  having reason to believe  that the same was stolen, and 
that any money has on his arrest  been taken out of the possession of  the convicted person, the Court may, on the 
application of such purchaser and on the restitution of the stolen property to the person  entitled to the possession 
thereof, order that out of such money a sum not exceeding the price paid by such purchaser be delivered to him.  
454. Appeal against orders under section 452 or section 453. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made 
by a Court under section 452 or section 453, may appeal against it to the Court to which appeals or dinarily lie from 
convictions by the former Court.  
(2) On such appeal, the Appellate Court may direct the order to be stayed pending disposal of the appeal, or 
may modify, alter or annul the order and make any further orders that may be just.  
(3) The power s referred to in sub -section (2) may also be exercised by a Court of appeal, confirmation or 
revision while dealing with the case in which the order referred to in sub -section (1) was made.  
455. Destruction of libellous and other matter. —(1) On a convictio n under section 292, section 293, section 
501 or section 502 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the Court may order the destruction of all the copies of the 
thing in respect of which the conviction was had, and which are  in the custody of the Court or remain in the 
possession or power of the person convicted.  208 
 (2) The Court may, in like manner, on a conviction under section 272, section 273, section 274 or section 275 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), order the food, drink, drug or medical preparati on in respect of which the 
conviction was had, to be destroyed.  
456. Power to restore possession of immovable property. —(1) When a person is convicted of an offence 
attended by criminal force or show of force or by criminal intimidation, and it appears to the Court that, by such 
force or show of force or intimidation, any person has been dispossessed of any immovable property, the Court may, 
if it thinks fit,  order that possession of the same be restored to that person after evicting by force, if necessary,  any 
other person who may be in possession of the property:  
Provided that no such order shall be made by the Court more than one month after the date of the conviction.  
(2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an order under sub -section (1), the Court of appeal, 
confirmation or revision may, if it thinks fit,  make such order while disposing of the appeal, reference or revision,  as 
the case may be.  
(3) Where an order has been made under sub -section (1), the provisions of section 454 shall apply in  relation 
thereto as they apply in relation to an order under section 453.  
(4) No order made under  this section shall prejudice any right or interest to or in such immovable property 
which any person may be able to establish in a civil suit.  
457. Procedur e by police upon seizure of property. —(1) Whenever the seizure of property by any police 
officer is reported to a Magistrate under the provisions of this Code, and such property is not produced before a 
Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the Magist rate may make such order as  he thinks fit respecting the disposal 
of such property or the delivery of such property to the person entitled to the possession thereof, or if such person 
cannot be ascertained, respecting the custody and production of such pro perty.  
(2) If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order the property to be delivered to him on such 
conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if such person is unknown, the Magistrate may detain it and shall , 
in such case, issue a proclamation specifying the articles of which such property consists, and requiring any person 
who may have a claim thereto, to appear before him and establish his claim within six months from the date of such  
proclamation.  
458. Procedure where  no claima nt appears within six months. —(1) If no person within such period 
establishes his claim to such property, and if the person in whose possession such property was found is unable to 
show that it was legally acquired by him, the Magistrate may  by order  direct that such property shall be at the 
disposal of the State Government  and may be sold by that Government and the proceeds of such sale shall be dealt 
with in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) An appeal shall lie against any such order to the Court to  which appeals ordinarily lie from convictions by 
the Magistrate.  
459. Power to  sell perishable property. —If the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown 
or absent and the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if the Magi strate to whom its seizure is reported 
is of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of the owner, or that the value of such property is 1[less than five 
hundred  rupees ], the Magistrate may at any time direct it to be sold; and the provisions of sec tions 457 and 458 
shall, as nearly as  may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.  
CHAPTER XXXV  
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS  
460. Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings. —If any Magistrate not empowered by law to do any of 
the following thi ngs, namely: — 
(a) to issue a search -warrant under section 94;  
(b) to order, under section 155, the police to investigate an offence;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 41, for “less than ten rupees” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  209 
 (c) to hold an inquest under section 176;  
(d) to issue process under section 187, for the apprehension of a person within h is local jurisdiction who 
has committed an offence outside the limits of such jurisdiction;  
(e) to take cognizance of an offence under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 190;  
(f) to make over a case under sub -section (2) of section 192;  
(g) to tender a pardon under section 306;  
(h) to recall a case and try it himself under section 410; or  
(i) to sell property under section 458 or section 459,  
erroneously in good faith does that thing, his proceedings shall not be set aside merely on the  ground of his not 
being so empowered.  
461. Irregularities which vitiate proceedings. —If any Magistrate, not being empowered by law in this behalf, 
does any of the following things, namely: — 
(a) attaches and sells property under section 83;  
(b) issues a se arch-warrant for a document, parcel or other things in the custody of a postal or telegraph 
authority;  
(c) demands security to keep the peace;  
(d) demands security for good behaviour;  
(e) discharges a person lawfully bound to be of good behaviour;  
(f) cancels a bond to keep the peace;  
(g) makes an order for maintenance;  
(h) makes an order under section 133 as to a local nuisance;  
(i) prohibits, under section 143, the repetition or continuance of a public nuisance;  
(j) makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter X;  
(k) takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of sub -section (1) of section 190;  
(l) tries an offender;  
(m) tries an offender summarily;  
(n) passes a sentence, under section 325, on proceedings recorded by another Magistrate;  
(o) decide s an appeal;  
(p) calls, under section 397, for proceedings; or  
(q) revises an order passed under section 446,  
his proceedings shall be void.  
462. Proceedings in wrong place. —No finding, sentence or order of any Criminal Court shall be set aside 
merely on  the ground that the inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the course of which it was arrived at or passed, 
took place in a wrong sessions division, district, sub -division or other local area, unless it appears that such error has 
in fact occasioned a fai lure of justice.  
463. Non -compliance with provisions of section 164 or section 281. —(1) If any Court before which a 
confession or other statement of an accused person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section 164 or 
section 281, is tendered, or  has been received, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections 
have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may, notwithstanding anything contained 210 
 in section 91 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), take evidence in regard to such non -compliance, and 
may, if satisfied that such non -compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly 
made the statement recorded, admit such statement.  
(2) The provisions of this  section apply to Courts of appeal, reference and revision.  
464. Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge. —(1) No finding, sentence or order by a 
Court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid merely on the ground that no ch arge was framed or on the 
ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in the 
opinion of the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.  
(2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, is of opinion that a failure of justice has in fact been 
occasioned, it may, — 
(a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be framed, and that the trial be 
recommended from the po int immediately after the framing of the charge;  
(b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a charge 
framed in whatever manner it thinks fit:  
Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the fact s of the case are such that no valid charge could be preferred 
against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction.  
465. Finding or sentence when  reversible by reason of error , omission or irregularity. —(1) Subject to the 
provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence or order passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be 
reversed or altered by a Court of appeal, confirmation of revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in  
the complaint, summons ,  warrant, proclamation,  order,  judgment or  other proceedings before  or  during   trial or  
in   any  inquiry or other proceedings under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the 
prosecution, unless in the opinion of that Court,  a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.  
(2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any proceeding under this Code, or any error ,      
or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution has occasioned a failure of justice, the Court shall have regard to 
the fact whether the objection could and should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.  
466. Defect or error not to make attachment unlawful. —No attachment made under this Code shall be 
deemed unlawf ul, nor shall any per son making the same be deemed a  trespasser, on account of any defect or want of 
form in the summons, conviction, writ of attachment or other proceedings relating thereto.  
CHAPTER XXXVI1 
LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFEN CES 
467. Definitions. —For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “period of 
limitation ” means the period specified in section 468 for taking cognizance of an offence.  
468. Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation. —(1) Except as otherwise provided 
elsewhere in this Code, no Court shall take cognizance of an offence of the category specified in sub -section (2), 
after the expiry of the period of limitation.  
(2) The period of limitation shall be — 
(a) six mon ths, if the offence is punishable with fine only;  
(b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year;  
(c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding one year but not 
exceedin g three years.  
                                                 
1. Provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to certain economic offences, see the Econo mic Offences (Inapplicability of 
Limitation) Act, 1974 (12 of 1974), s. 2 and Sch.  211 
 1[(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation, in relation to offences which may be tried 
together, shall be determined with reference to the offence which is punishable with the more severe punishment or, 
as the case may be, the most severe punishment.]  
469. Commencement of the period of limitation. —(1) The period of limitation, in relation to an offender, 
shall commence, — 
(a) on the date of the offence; or  
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the perso n aggrieved by the offence or to any 
police officer, the first day on which such offence comes to the knowledge of such person or to any police 
officer, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, the first day on  which the identity of the 
offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the police officer making investigation into the 
offence, whichever is earlier.  
(2) In computing the said period, the day from which such period is to be computed sha ll be excluded.  
470. Exclusion of time in certain cases. —(1) In computing the period of limitation, the time during 
which any person has been prosecuting with due diligence another prosecution, whether in a Court of first 
instance or in a Court of appeal o r revision, against the offender, shall be excluded:  
Provided that no such exclusion shall be made unless the prosecution relates to the same facts and is 
prosecuted in good faith in a Court which from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature , is unable 
to entertain it.  
(2) Where the institution of the prosecution in respect of an offence has been stayed by an injunction or 
order, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the 
day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.  
(3) Where notice of prosecution for an offence has been given, or where, under any law for the time being  
in force, the previous  consent or sanction of the Government o r any other authority is required for the 
institution of any prosecution for an offence, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of such 
notice or, as the case may be, the time required for obtaining such consent or sanction shall be exclud ed. 
Explanation. —In computing the time required for obtaining the consent or sanction of the Government or 
any other authority, the date on which the application was made for obtaining the consent or sanction and the 
date of receipt of the order of the Gov ernment or other authority shall both be excluded.  
(4) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which the offender — 
(a) has been absent from India or from any territory outside India which is under the administration of 
the Central Government , or 
(b) has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself,  
shall be excluded.  
471. Exclusion of date on which Court is closed. —Where the period of limitation expires on a day when 
the Court is closed, the Court may take cognizance on the day on whic h the Court reopens.  
Explanation. —A Court shall be deemed to be closed on any day within the meaning of this section, if, during its 
normal working hours, it remains closed on that day.  
472. Continuing offence. —In the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limitation shall begin to run at 
every moment of the time during which the offence continues.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 33  (w.e.f. 18.12.1978).   212 
 473. Extension of period of limitation in  certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, any Court may t ake cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of 
limitation, if it is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been properly 
explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice.  
STATE A MENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Chapter XXXVI of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not to apply to certain offences. -Nothing in Chapter 
XXXVI of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973, shall apply to — 
(i) any offences punishable under any of the enactme nts specified in the Schedule; or  
(ii) any other offences, which under the provisions of that Code, may be tried along with such offences, and 
every offence referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii), may be taken cognizance of by the court having jurisdicti on as if 
the provisions of that Chapter were not enacted.  
[Vide the Andhra Pradesh Act 17 of 1982, s. 2]  
CHAPTER XXXVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 474. Trials before High Courts. —When an offence is tried by the High Court otherwise than under section 
407, it shall, in  the trial of the offence, observe the same procedure as a Court of Sessions would observe if it were 
trying the case . 
475. Delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be tried by Court -martial. —(1) The Central 
Government may make rules consistent  with this Code and the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the Navy Act, 1957 
(62 of 1957), and the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), and any other law, relating to the Armed Forces of the 
Union, for the time being in force, as to cases in which persons subject to military, naval or air -force law, or such 
other law, shall be tried by a Court to which this Code applies, or by a Court -martial; and when any person is 
brought before a Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by  a Court to which 
this Code applies or by a Court -martial, such Magistrate shall have regard to such rules, and shall in proper cases 
deliver him, together with a statement of the offence of  which he is accused,  to  the commanding   officer of the 
unit to  which he belongs, or to the commanding officer of the nearest military, naval or air -force station, as the case 
may be, for the purpose of being tried by a Court -martial.  
Explanation. —In this section — 
(a) “Unit” includes a regiment, corps, ship, detachmen t, group, battalion or Company,  
(b) “Court -martial ” includes any Tribunal with the powers similar to those of a Court -martial constituted 
under the relevant law applicable to the Armed Forces of the Union.  
(2) Every Magistrate shall, on receiving a written  application for that purpose by the commanding officer of any 
unit or body of soldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed at any such place, use his utmost endeavours to 
apprehend and secure any person accused of such offence.  
(3) A High Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that a prisoner detained in any jail situate within the State be 
brought before a Court -martial for trial or to be examined touching any matter pending before the Court -martial.  
476. Forms. —Subject to the power conferred by article  227 of the Constitution, the forms set forth in the 
Second Schedule, with such variations as the circumstances of each case require, may be used for the respective 
purposes therein mentioned, and if used shall be sufficient.  
477. Power of High Court to ma ke rules. —(1) Every High Court may, with the previous approval of the State 
Government, make rules — 
(a) as to the persons who may be permitted to act as petition -writers in the Criminal Courts subordinate to 
it; 
(b) regulating the  issue of licences to such  persons, the conduct of business by them, and the scale of fees to 
be charged by them;  
(c) providing a penalty for a contravention of any of the rules so made and determining the authority by 
which such contravention may be investigated and the penalties imposed;  213 
 (d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(2) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
1[478. Power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrate in certain cases. —If the Legis lative 
Assembly of a State by a resolution so permits, the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, 
by notification, direct that references in sections 108, 109, 110, 145 and 147 to an Executive Magistrate shall be 
construed as referen ces to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
In the Code, as it applies to the Union territories to which this Regulation extends, in sections, 47 8, the 
words “if the State Legislature by a resolution so requires. ” Shall be omitted.  
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974) s. 6] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 478 of Act 2 of 1974 .—In section 478 of the sai d Code, in clause (b), 
for the words “to and Executive Magistrate shall be construed” the words “to and Executive 
Magistrate in the areas of the State outside Greater Bombay shall be construed” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 1 of 1978, s. 4]  
479. Case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested. —No Judge or Magistrate shall, except with 
the permission of the Court to which an appeal lies from his Court, try or commit for trial any case to or in which he 
is a party, or personally inte rested, and no Judge or Magistrate shall hear an appeal from any judgment or order 
passed or made by himself.  
Explanation. —A Judge or Magistrate shall not be deemed to be a party to, or personally interested in, any case 
by reason only that he is concerned  therein in a public capacity, or by reason only that he has viewed the place in 
which an offence is alleged to have been committed, or any other place in which any other transaction material to 
the case is alleged to have occurred, and made an inquiry in connection with the case.  
480. Practising pleader not to sit as Magistrate in certain Courts. —No pleader who practises in the Court of 
any Magistrate shall sit as a Magistrate in that Court or in any Court within the local jurisdiction of that Court.  
STATE  AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 480A.  —After section 480 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 
1974) the following Section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“480A. Other powers of Magistrate .—Any Judicial Magistrate or Executiv e Magistrate shall be entitled to 
attest, verify or authenticate any document brought before him for the purpose of attestation, verification or 
authentication, as the case may be, and to affix seals thereon, as may be prescribed by any law for the time be ing in 
force. ”. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 35 of 1984, s. 2]  
481. Public servant concerned in sale not to purchase or bid for property. —A public servant having any 
duty to perform in connection with the sale of any property under this Code shall not purchase or b id for the 
property.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 8, for s. 478 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  214 
 482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court. —Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or affect the 
inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this 
Code, or to prev ent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.  
483. Duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence over Courts of Judicial Magistrates. —
Every High Court shall so exercise its superintendence over the Courts of Judicial Magistrates subordinate to it as to 
ensure that there is an expeditious and proper disposal of cases by such Magistrates.  
484. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such r epeal — 
(a) if, immediately before the date on which this Code comes into force, there is any appeal, application, 
trial, inquiry or investigation pending, then, such appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation shall be 
disposed of, continued, held  or made, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), as in force immediately before such commencement (hereinafter referred 
to as the old Code), as if this Code had not come into force:  
Provi ded that every inquiry under Chapter XVIII of the Old Code, which is pending at the commencement 
of this Code, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Code;  
(b) all notifications published, proclamations issued, powers  conferred, forms prescribed, local jurisdictions 
defined, sentences passed and orders, rules and appointments, not being appointments as Special Magistrates, 
made under the Old Code and which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Code, shall be 
deemed, respectively, to have been published, issued, conferred, prescribed, defined, passed or made under the 
corresponding provisions of this Code;  
(c) any sanction accorded or consent given under the Old Code in pursuance of which no proceeding  was 
commenced under that Code, shall be deemed to have been accorded or given under the corresponding 
provisions of this Code and proceedings may be commenced under this Code in pursuance of such sanction of 
consent;  
(d) the provisions of the Old Code sha ll continue to apply  in relation to every prosecution against a Ruler 
within the  meaning of article 363 of the Constitution.  
(3) Where the period prescribed for an application or  other proceeding under the Old Code had expired on or 
before the commencemen t of this Code, nothing in this Code shall be construed as enabling any such application to 
be made or  proceeding to be commenced under this Code by reason only of the fact that a longer period therefor is 
prescribed by this Code or provisions are made in this Code for the extension of time.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 484 of said Code, in sub -section (2), after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted 
and be deemed always to have been inserted, namely : — 
“(e) the provisions of the Un ited Provinces Borstal Act, 1938, the United Provinces first Offenders’  
Probation Act, 1938 and the Uttar Pradesh Children Act, 1951, shall continue in force in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh until altered or repealed or amended by the Competent Legislature o r other competent authority, 
and accordingly, the provisions of section 360 of this Code shall not apply to that State, and the 
provisions of section 361 shall apply with the substitution of references to the Central Acts named therein 
by references to the  corresponding Acts in force in that State.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 10]  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 484 of the said Code, in sub -section (2), the clause (a), after the proviso, the following 215 
 further proviso shall be inserted, namely  :— 
“Provid ed further that the provisions of section 326 of this Code as amended by the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976 shall apply also to every trial pending in a  Court of 
Session at the commencement of this Code and also pending at the commencement of the code of 
Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 11] 216 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES  
EXPLANATORY  NOTES : (1)  In regard to offences under the Indian Penal Code, the  entries in the second and 
third columns against a section the number of which is given in the first column are 
not intended as the definition of, and the punishment prescribed for, the offence in 
the Indian Penal Code, but merely as indication of the subs tance of the section.  
 (2)  In this Schedule, ( i) the expression “Magistrate of the first class ” and “Any 
Magistrate ” include Metropolitan Magistrates but not Executive Magistrates; ( ii) the 
word “cognizable ” stands for “a police officer may arrest without  warrant ”; and ( iii) 
the word “non-cognizable ” stands for “a police officer shall not arrest without 
warrant ”. 
I.–OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE  
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or non -
cognizable  Bailable or Non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
  1 2 3 4 5 6      
CHAPTER V.  –ABETMENT  
109 Abetment of any offence, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence, and where no 
express provision is made for its punishment.  Same as for offence 
abetted.  According as offence 
abetted is cognizable 
or non -cognizable.  According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Court by 
which 
offence 
abetted is 
triable.  
110 Abetment of any offence, if the person abetted 
does the act with a different intention from 
that of the abettor.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto Ditto . 
111 Abetment of any offence, when one act is 
abetted and  a different act is done; subject to 
the proviso.  Same as  for offence 
intended to be abetted.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
113 Abetment of any offence, when an effect is 
caused by the act abetted differen t from that 
intended by the abettor.  Same as for offence 
committed.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
114 Abetment of any offence, if abettor is present 
when offence is committed.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
115 Abetment of an offence, punishable with death 
or imprisonmen t for life, if the offence be not 
committed in consequence of the abetment.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Non-bailable  Ditto.  
 If an act which causes harm be done in 
consequence of the abetment.  Imprisonment for 14 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto. 
116 Abetment of any offence, punishable with 
imprisonment, if the offence be not committed 
in consequence of the abetment.  Imprisonment extending to 
a quarter part of the longest 
term provided for the 
offence, or fine, or both.  Ditto  According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Ditto.  
 
 If the abettor or the person abetted   be   a   
public  servant whose duty it is to prevent the 
offence.  Imprisonment extending to 
half of the longest term   
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.       Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  217 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
117 Abetting the commission of an offence by the 
public  or by more than ten persons.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  According as offence 
abetted is cognizable 
or non -cognizable.  According as 
offence ab etted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Court by 
which 
offence 
abetted is 
triable.  
118 Concealing a design to commit an offence 
punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life, if the offence be committed.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Non-bailable.  Ditto.  
 If the offence be not committed  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Bailable.  Ditto.  
119 A public servant concealing a design to 
commit an offence which it is his duty to 
prevent, if the offence be committed.  Imprisonment extending to 
half o f the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Ditto.  
 If the offence be punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life.  Imprisonment for 10 years.  Ditto  Non-bailable.  Ditto.  
 If the offence be not committed.  Imprisonment extending to 
a quarter part of the longest 
term provided for the 
offence, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Bailable.  Ditto.  
120 Concealing a design to commit an offence 
punishable with imprisonment, if offence be 
committed.  Ditto  Ditto  According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Ditto.  
 If the offence be not committed.  Imprisonment extending to 
one-eighth part of the 
longest term provided for 
the offence, or fine, or 
both.  Ditto  Bailable.  Ditto.  
CHAPTE R VA. –CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY  
120B  Criminal conspiracy to commit an offence 
punishable with death, imprisonment for life 
or rigorous imprisonment for a term of 2 years 
or upwards.  Same as for abetment of 
the offence which is the 
object of the conspiracy.  Accor ding as the 
offence which is the 
object of conspiracy 
is cognizable or non -
cognizable.  According as 
offence which is 
object of 
conspiracy is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Court by 
which 
abetment of 
the offence 
which is the 
object of 
conspiracy is 
triable.  
 Any other criminal conspiracy.  Imprisonment  for             
6 months, or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable.  Bailable.  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
CHAPTER VI. –OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE  
121 Waging or attempting to wage war, or abetting 
the waging of war, ag ainst the Government of 
India.  Death,  or imprisonment 
for life and fine.  Cognizable.  Non-bailable.  Court of 
Session.  
121A  Conspiring to commit certain offences against 
the State.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto. 
122 Collecting arms, etc., with the intention of 
waging war against the Government of India.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
123 Concealing  with intent to facilitate a design to 
wage war.  Imprisonme nt for 10 years  
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
124 Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent 
to compel or restrain the exercise of any lawful 
power.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  218 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
124A  Sedition  Imprisonment for  life and 
fine, or imprisonment for  
3 years and fine, or fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
125 Waging war against any Asiatic power in 
alliance or at peace with the Government of 
India, or abetting the waging of such war.  Imprisonment for l ife and 
fine, or imprisonment for 7 
years and fine, or fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
126 Committing depredation on the territories of 
any power in alliance or at peace with the 
Government of India.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine, and forfeiture of 
certain p roperty.  Ditto  Ditto.  Ditto.  
127 Receiving property taken by war or 
depredation mentioned in sections 125 and 
126. Ditto.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
128 Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of 
State or war in his custody to escape.  Imprisonment for life , or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
129 Public servant negligently suffering prisoner 
of State of  war in his custody to escape.  Simple imprisonment for 3 
years and fine.  Ditto            Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
130 Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring, such 
prisoner, or offering any resistance to the 
recapture of such prisoner.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto         Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
CHAPTER VII. –OFFENCES RELAT ING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE  
131 Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce an 
officer, soldier, sailor or airman from his 
allegiance or duty.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Cognizable      Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
132 Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in 
consequence thereof.  Death, or imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
133 Abetment of an assault by an officer, soldier, 
sailor or airman on his superior officer,  when 
in the execution of his office.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
134 Abetment of such assault, if the assault is 
committed.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
135 Abetment of the desert ion of an officer, 
soldier, sailor or airman.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto            Bailable    Any 
Magistrate.  
136 Harbouring such an officer,. soldier, sailor or 
airman who has deserted.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
137 Deserter concea led on board merchant vessel, 
through negligence of master or person in 
charge thereof.  Fine of 500 rupees.  Non-cognizable  Ditto. Ditto. 
138 Abetment of act of insubordination by an 
officer, soldier, sailor or airman, if the offence 
be committed in conseq uence.  Imprisonment for              
6 months, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto. Ditto. 
140 Wearing the dress or carrying any token used by a 
soldier, sailor or airman with intent that it may be 
believed that he is such a soldier, sailor or airman.  Impr isonment for 3 
months, or fine of           
500  rupees, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto  Ditto  
CHAPTER VIII. –OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILITY  
143 Being member of an unlawful assembly.  Imprisonment for              
6 months, or fine, or both.                Cognizable  Bailable  Any  
Magistrate.  
144 Joining an unlawful assembly armed with any 
deadly weapon.   Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.                  Ditto  Bailable  Ditto  
145 Joining or continuing in an unlawful assembly, 
knowing that it has been commanded to 
disperse.  Ditto                  Ditto           Ditto  Ditto.  
147 Rioting.  Ditto                  Ditto           Ditto  Ditto.  219 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
148 Rioting, armed with a deadly weapon.   Imprisonment for  3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
149 If an offence be committed by any member of 
an unlawful assembly, every other member of 
such assembly shall be guilty of the offence.  The same as for the 
offence.  According as offence 
is cognizable or  non -
cognizable  According  as 
offence is bailable 
or non -bailable  The Court by 
which the 
offence is 
triable.  
150 Hiring, engaging or employing persons to take 
part in  an unlawful assembly.  The same as for a member 
of such assembly, and for 
any offence committed by 
any mem ber of such 
assembly.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
151 Knowingly joining or continuing in any 
assembly of five or more persons after it has 
been commanded to disperse.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine or both.  Ditto  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
152 Assaulting o r obstructing  public servant when 
suppressing riot, etc.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or  both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
153 Wantonly giving provocation with intent to 
cause riot, if rioting be committed.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
 If not committed.  Imprisonment for              
6 months, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
153A  Promoting enmity between classes.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Non-bailable  Ditto  
 Promoting enmity between classes in place of 
worship, etc.  Imprisonment for 5 years, 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
153B  Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national 
integration.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine,  or both.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto  
 If committed in a place of public worship, etc.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
154 Owner or occupier of land not giving 
information of riot, etc.  Fine of 1,000 rupees.  Non-cognizable  Bailable       Any     
Magistrate.  
155 Person for whose benefit or on whose behalf a 
riot takes place not using all lawful means to 
prevent it.  Fine Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
156 Agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit 
a riot is committed not using all lawful means 
to prevent it.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
157 Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful 
assembly.  Imprisonment for  6 
months, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto  
158 Being hired to take part in an unlawful 
assembly or riot.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
 Or to go armed.  Imprisonment fo r 2 years, 
or fine, or  both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
160 Committing affray  Imprisonment for one 
month, or fine of 100 
rupees or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  220 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
CHAPTER IX. –OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS  
CHAPTER  IXA.—OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS  
171E  Bribery.  Imprisonment for 1 year or 
fine, or   both, or if treating 
only, fine only.        Non-cognizable  Ditto   Magistrate 
of   the first 
class.  
171F  Undue influence at an election.  
Personation at an election  Imprisonment for one year,  
or fine, or   both.  
Ditto  Ditto  
 
Cognizable  Ditto  
Ditto  Ditto.  
 
Ditto.  
171G  False statement in connection with an election.  Fine       Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
  171H  Illegal payments in connection with elections.  Fine of 500 rupees.  Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. 
  171-I Failure to keep election accounts.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).   161 Being or  expecting to be a public  servant, and 
taking a gratification other  than legal 
remuneration in respect of an official act.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.               Cognizable         Non-bailable   Magistrate 
of the first 
class.  
162 Taking a gratification in order , by corrupt or 
illegal means, to influence a public servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
163 Taking a gratification for the exercise of 
personal influence with  a public servant.  Simple imprisonment for    
1 year, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
164 Abetment by public servant of the offences 
defined in the last two preceding clauses with 
reference to himself.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
165 Public servant obtaining any valuable thing, 
without consideration, from a person concerned 
in any proceeding or business transacted by 
such public servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
165A  Punishment for abetment of offences 
punishable under section 161 or section 165.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
166 Public servant disobeying a dire ction of the law 
with intent to cause injury to any person.  Simple imprisonment for   
1 year, or fine, or both.        Non-cognizable            Bailable  Ditto.  
1[166A  Public servant  disobeying direction under law  Imprisonment   for 
minimum 6 months 
which may extend to 2 
years and fine.  Cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class  
166B  Non-treatment of victim by hospital  Imprisonment for 1 year 
or fine or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.]  
167 Public servant framing an inco rrect document 
with  intent to cause injury.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.          Cognizable  Ditto. Ditto. 
168 Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.  Simple imprisonment for 
1 year, or fine, or both.      Non-cognizable  
 Ditto  Ditto.  
169 Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for 
property.  Simple imprisonment for 
2 years, or fine, or both 
and confiscation of 
property, if purchased.  Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. 
170 Personating a public servant.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
or fine, or   both .        Cognizable        Non-bailable  Any  
Magistrate.  
171 Wearing garb or carrying token used by public 
servant with fraudulent intent.  Imprisonment for              
3  months, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both.  Ditto             Bailable  Ditto.  221 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
CHAPTER X.–CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS  
172 Absconding to avoid service of summons or 
other proceeding from a public ser vant.  Simple imprisonment for    
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable    Bailable  Any Magistrate.  
 If summons or notice require attendance in 
person, etc., in a Court of Justice.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
173 Preventing the service or the affixing of any 
summons of notice, or the removal of it when 
it has been affixed, or preventing a 
proclamation.  Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If summons, etc., require attendance in person, 
etc., in a Court of Justice.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
174 Not obeying a legal order to attend at a certain 
place in person or by agent , or departing there 
from without authority.  Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If the order requires personal attendance, etc., 
in a Court of Justice.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,00 0 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
1[174A  Failure to appear at specified place and 
specified time as required by a proclamation 
published under sub -section ( 1) of section 82 
of this Code  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or with fine, or with both  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 In a case where declaration has been made 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 82 of this 
Code pronouncing a person as proclaimed 
offender  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto].  
175 Intentionally omi tting to produce a document 
to a public servant by a person legally bound 
to produce or deliver such document.  Simple imprisonment for     
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  2[Non -
cognizable]  3[Bailable]  The Court in which 
the offence is 
committed, s ubject to 
the provisions of 
Chapter XXVI; or, if  
not committed, in a 
court, any Magistrate.  
 If the document is required to be produced in 
or delivered to a Court of Justice.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto. Ditto.  
176 Intentionally omitting to give notice or 
information to a public servant by a person 
legally bound to give such notice or 
information.  Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Any Magistrate.  
 If the notice or information required respects 
the commission of an offence, etc.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  
 If the notice or information is required by an 
order passed under sub -section (1) of section 
356 of this Code.   Imprisonment  for            
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
177 Knowingly furnishing false information to a 
public servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If the information required respects the 
comm ission of an offence, etc.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for “Ditto”, in the column 4 relating to s.  175 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for “Ditto”, in the column 5 relating to s.  175 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  222 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
178 Refusing oath when duly required to take oath 
by a public servant.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of     
1,000 rupees, or both.  Non-cogn izable  Bailable  The Court in which 
the offence is 
committed,  subject to 
the provisions of 
Chapter XXVI ; or, if 
not committed in a 
Court, any 
Magistrate.  
179 Being legally bound to state truth, and refusing 
to answer questions.  Ditto  Ditto   Ditto               Ditto.  
180 Refusing to sign  a statement made to a public 
servant when legally required to do so.  Simple imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
181 Knowingly stating to a public servant on oath 
as true that w hich is false.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
182 Giving false information to a public servant in 
order to cause him to use his lawful power to 
the injury or annoyance of any person.  Imprisonment for 6 
months , or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. . 
183 Resistance to the taking of property by the  
lawful  authority of a public servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
184 Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by 
authority of a public s ervant.  Imprisonment for 1 month, 
or fine of 500 rupees, or 
both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
185 Bidding, by a person under a legal incapacity 
to purchase it, for property at a lawfully        
authorised  sale, or bidding without intending 
to perform the  obligat ions incurred thereby.  
 Imprisonment for 1 month, 
or fine of 200 rupees, or 
both.  
 
 Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
186 Obstructing public servant in discharge of his 
public functions.  
 Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
187 Omission to assist public servant when bound 
by law to give such assistance.  Simple imprisonment for 1 
month, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
 Wilfully neglecting to aid a public servant who 
demands aid in the execution of process, the  
prevention of offences, etc.  Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
188 Disobedience to an order lawfully 
promulgated by a public servant, if such 
disobedience causes obstruction, annoyance or 
injury to per sons lawfully employed.  Simple imprisonment for 1 
month, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
 If such disobedience causes danger to human 
life, health or safety, etc.  Imprisonment  for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto . 
189 Threatening a public servant with injury to 
him or one in whom he is interested, to induce 
him to do or forbear to do any official act.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.          Non-
cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
190 Threatening any pe rson to induce him to 
refrain from making a legal application for 
protection from injury.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 223 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
 CHAPTER XI. –FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE  
193 Giving or fabricatin g false evidence in a 
judicial proceeding.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 Giving or fabricating false evidence in any 
other case  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Any Magistrate.  
194 Giving or fabricating false evidence with 
intent to cause any person to be convicted of 
capital  offence.  Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto  Non-
bailable  Court of session.  
 If innocent person be thereby convicte d and 
executed.  Death, or as above.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
195 Giving or fabricating false evidence with 
intent to procure conviction of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment for life or with 
imprisonment for 7 years, or upwards.  The same as for the 
offence . Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
1[195A  Threatening any person to give false evidence.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Court by which 
offence of giving 
false evidence is 
triable.  
 If innocent person is convicted and sentenced 
in conseque nce of false evidence with death, 
or imprisonment for more than seven years.  The same as for the 
offence.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto]  
196 Using in a judicial proceeding evidence 
known to be false or fabricated.  The same as for giving or 
fabricating false evidence.  2[Non -cognizable]  According 
as offence 
of giving 
such 
evidence 
is bailable 
or non -
bailable.  Court by which 
offence of giving or 
fabricating false 
evidence is triable.  
197 Knowingly issuing or signing a false 
certificate relating to any fact of which such  
certificate is by law admissible in evidence.  Ditto  Ditto  Bailable  Court by  which 
offence of giving false 
evidence is triable.  
198 Using as a true certificate  one known to be 
false in a material point.  Ditto Ditto Ditto  Ditto . 
199 False statement made  in any declaration which 
is by law receivable as evidence.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto . 
200 Using as true any such declaration known to 
be false.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto . 
201 Causing disappearance of evidence of an 
offence committed, or giving false 
informa tion touching it to screen the offender, 
if a capital offence.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  According as the 
offence in relation to 
which disappearance 
of evidence is caused 
is cognizable or non -
cognizable.  Ditto  Court of Session.  
 If punishable wit h imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.        Non-cognizable  Ditto Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 If punishable with less than 10 years’ 
imprisonment.  Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Court by which the 
offence is triable.  
202 Intentional omission to give information of an 
offence by a person legally bound to inform.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both . Ditto Ditto Any Magist rate. 
203 Giving false information respecting an offence 
committed.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by A ct 2 of 2006, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
2.  Subs. by s. 7, ibid. for “Ditto” , in the column 4  relating to s.1 96  (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  224 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
204 Secreting or destroying any document to 
prevent its production as evidence.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
205 False personation for  the purpose of any act 
or proceeding in a suit or criminal 
prosecution, or for becoming bail or security.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto 
206 Fraudulent removal or concealment, etc., of 
property to prevent its seizure as a forfeiture 
or in satisfaction of a fine under sentence, or in 
execution of a  decree.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate.  
207 Claiming property without right, or practicing 
deception touching any right to it, to prevent its 
being taken as a forfeiture, or in satisfaction of a 
fine under sentence, or in execution of a decree.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
208 Fraudulently sufferin g a decree to pass for a 
sum not due, or suffering decree to be 
executed after it has been satisfied.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the first 
class.  
209 False claim in a Court of Justice.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
210 Fraudu lently obtaining a decree for a sum not 
due, or causing a decree to be executed after it 
has been satisfied.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine , or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
211 False charge of offence made with intent to 
injure.     
 Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If offence charged be punishable with 
imprisonment for 7 years or upwards.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto 
 If offence charged be capital or punishable 
with imprisonment for life.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Court of Session.  
212 Harbou ring an offender, if the offence be 
capital.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Ditto  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for 1 year 
and not for 10 years.  Imprisonment for  a quarter 
of the longest term, and of 
the descriptions, provided 
for the offence, or fine, or 
both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
213 Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender fro m 
punishment if the offence be capital.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonm ent for less than  
10 years.  Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
214 Offering gift or restoration of property in 
consideration of screening offender if the 
offence be capital.  Impri sonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Non-cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for less than 
10 years.  Imprison ment for a quarter 
of the longest term, 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
215 Taking gift to help to recover movable 
property of which a person has been deprived  
by an offence without causing apprehension of 
offender.  Impriso nment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 225 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
216 
 Harbouring an offender who has escaped from 
custody, or whose apprehension has been 
ordered, if the offence be capital.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
with or without fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for 1 year 
and not for 10 years.  Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
216A  Harbouring robbers or dacoits.  Rigorous imprisonment for 
7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto . 
217 Public servant disobeying a direction of law with 
intent to save person from punishment, or 
property from forfeiture.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto Any Magistrate.  
218 Public servant framing an    incorrect record or 
writing with intent to save person from 
punishment, or pr operty from forfeiture.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto Magistrate of the first 
class. 
219 Public servant in a judicial proceeding 
corruptly making and pronouncing an order, 
report, verdict, or decision which he knows to 
be co ntrary to law.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non- cognizable  Ditto Ditto . 
220 Commitment for trial or confinement by a 
person having authority, who knows that he is 
acting contrary to law.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
221 Intentional omission t o apprehend on the part 
of a public servant bound by law to apprehend 
an offender, if the offence be capital.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
with or without fine.  According as the 
offence in relation to 
which such omission 
has been made is 
cognizable or non -
cognizable.  Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
with or without fine.  Cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for less than 
10 years.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
with or without fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
222 Intentional omission to apprehend on the part 
of a public servant bound by law to apprehend 
person under sentence of a Court of Justice if 
under sentence of death.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 14 years , 
with or without fine.  Ditto Non-
bailable  Court of Session.  
 If under sentence of imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 years, or upwards.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
with or without fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 If under senten ce of imprisonment for less 
than 10 years or lawfully committed to 
custody.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Bailable  Ditto . 
223 Escape from confinement negligently suffered 
by a public servant.  Simple imprisonment for  
2 years, or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto Any Magistrate.  
224 Resistance or obstruction by a person to his 
lawful apprehension.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto Ditto . 
225 Resistance or obstruction to the lawful 
apprehension of any perso n, or rescuing him 
from lawful custody.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If charged with an offence punishable with 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for 10 
years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Non-
bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 If char ged with a capital offence.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 226 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
 If the person is sentenced to imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for 10 years, or upwards.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.    Cognizable  Non-
bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 If under sentence of death  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of Session.  
225A  Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of 
escape on part of public servant, in cases not 
otherwise pr ovided for: –     
 
   (a) in case of intentional omission or 
sufferance;  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.                                    Non-cognizable  Bailable  
        Magistrate of the first 
class.  
  (b) in case of negligent omission or  
sufferance.  Simple imprisonment for  
2 years, or fine, or both.  Ditto     Ditto  Any Magistrate.  
225B  Resistance or obstruction to lawful 
apprehension, or escape or rescue in cases not 
otherwise provided for.  Imprisonment for              
6 months, or fine , or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
227 Violation of condition of remission of 
punishment.  Punishment of original 
sentence, or if part of the 
punishment has been 
undergone, the residue.  Ditto Non-
bailable  The Court by which 
the original offence 
was triable . 
228 Intentional insult or interruption to a public 
servant sitting in any stage of a judicial  
proceeding.  Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  The Court in which the 
offence is committed 
subject to  the provisions 
of Chapter XXVI.  
1[228A  Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain 
offences, etc.  Imprisonment for two 
years and fine.       Cognizable  Ditto Any Magistrate.  
        Printing or publication of a proceeding 
without prior permission of  court.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto.]  
229 Personation of a juror or assessor.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
2[229A  Failure by person released on bail or bond to 
appear in Court  Imprisonment f or 1 year, 
or fine, or both  Cognizable  Non-
bailable  Any Magistrate.]  
CHAPTER XII. –OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS  
231 Counterfeiting, or performing any part of the 
process of counterfeiting, coin.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.            Cognizable      Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
232 Counterfeiting, or performing any part of the 
process of counterfeiting , Indian coin.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
233 Maki ng, buying or selling instrument for the 
purpose of counterfeiting  coin.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
234 Making, buying or selling instrument for the 
purpose of counterfeiting Indian coin.  Imprisonment f or 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
235 Possession of instrument or material for the 
purpose of using the same for counterfeiting 
coin.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
 If Indian coin.  Imprison ment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 5 (w.e.f. 25.12.1983).  
2.  Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).   
227 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
236 Abetting, in India, the counterfeiting, out of 
India, of coin.  The punishment provided for 
abetting the counterfeiting of 
such coin within India.            Cognizable      Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
237 Import or export of counterfeit coin, knowing the 
same to be counterfeit.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
238  Import or export of counterfeit of Indian coin, 
knowing the same t o be counterfeit.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
239  Having any counterfeit coin known to be such when 
it came into possession, and delivering, etc., the 
same to any person.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.     Ditto   Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
240 Same with respect to Indian coin.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
241 Knowingly delivering to another any counterfeit 
coin as genuine, which, when first  possessed, the 
deliverer did not know to be counterfeit.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or 10 times the 
value of the coin 
counterfeited, or both.  Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate.  
242 Possession of counterfeit coin by a person who 
knew it to be counterfeit  when he became 
possessed thereof.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
243 Possession of Indian coin by a person who knew 
it to be counterfeit when he became possessed 
thereof.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
244 Person employed in a Mint causing coin to be of 
a different weight or composition from that fixed 
by law.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto . 
245 Unlawfully taking from a Mint any coining 
instrument.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
246 Fraudulently diminishing the weight or altering 
the composition of Indian coin.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
247 Fraudulently diminishing the weight or altering 
the composition of Indian coin.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
248 Altering appearance of any coin with intent that it 
shall pass as a coin of a different description.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
249 Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent 
that it shall pass as a coin of a differ ent 
description.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
250 Delivery to another of coin possessed with the 
knowledge that it is altered.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
251 Delivery of Indian coin possessed with the 
knowledge that it is altered.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
252 Possession of altered coin by a person who knew 
it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate  of 
the first 
class.  
253 Possession of Indian coin by a person who knew 
it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
254 Delivery to another of coin as genuine which, 
when first possessed, the d eliverer did not know 
to be altered.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
or fine, or 10 times the 
value of the coin.  Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate.  
255 Counterfeiting a Government stamp.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of  
Session.  
256 Having possession of an instrument or material 
for the purpose of counterfeiting a Government 
stamp.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  228 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
257 Making, buying or selling instrument for the  
purpose of counterfeiting a Government stamp.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
258 Sale of counterfeit Government stamp.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
259 Having possession of a counterfeit Government 
stamp.  Ditto  Ditto  Bailable  Ditto.  
260 Using as genuine a Government stamp known to 
be counterfeit.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
261 Effacing any  writing  from a substance bearing a 
Government stamp, removing from a do cument a 
stamp used for it, with intent to cause a loss to 
Government.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
262 Using a Government stamp known to have been 
before used.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine,  or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
263 Erasure of mark denoting that stamps have been 
used.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
263A  Fictitious stamps  Fine of 200 rupees  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
CHAPTER XIII. –OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHT S AND MEASURES  
264 Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.     Non-cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
265 Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
266 Being  in possession of false weights or measures 
for fraudulent use.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
267 Making or selling false weights or measures for 
fraudulent use.  Ditto.          Cognizable        Non-bailable  Ditto. 
CHAPTER XIV. –OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS  
269 Negligently doing any act known to be likely to 
spread infection of any disease dangerous to 
life. Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both.      Cognizable       Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
270 Maligna ntly doing any act known to be likely 
to spread infection of any disease dangerous to 
life. Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
271 Knowingly disobeying any quarantine rule.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both.     Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
272 Adulterating food or drink intended for sale, so 
as to make the same noxious.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto.  
273 Selling any food or drink as food  and drink, 
knowing the same to  be noxious.  Ditto. Ditto. Ditto Ditto. 
274 Adulterating any drug or medical preparation 
intended for sale so as to lessen its efficacy, or 
to change its operation, or to make it noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  1[Non -bailable]  Ditto . 
275 Offering for sale or issuin g from a dispensary 
any drug or medical preparation known to have 
been adulterated.  Ditto  Ditto   2[Bailable]  Ditto . 
276 Knowingly selling or issuing from a dispensary 
any drug or medical preparation as a different 
drug or medical preparation.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42( f)(i),  for “Ditto” , in the column 5 rel ating to s. 274   (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by s.  42 (f) (ii), ibid., for  “Ditto”, in  the column 5 relating to s. 275 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).   229 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
277 Defiling the water of a public spring or 
reservoir.  Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
278 Making atmosphere noxious to health.  Fine of 500 rupees  Non-cognizable  Ditto Ditto.  
279 Driving or riding on a public way so rashly or 
negligently as to endanger human life, etc.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
 280 Navigating any vessel so rashly or negligently 
as to endan ger human life, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
281 Exhibition of a false light, mark or buoy.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
282 Conveying for hire any person by water, in a 
vessel in such a state, o r so loaded, as to 
endanger his life.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
283 Causing danger, obstruction or, injury in any 
public way or line of navigation.  Fine of 200 rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
284 Dealing with any poisonous substance so as to 
endanger human life, etc.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
285 Dealing with fire or any combustible matter so 
as to endanger human life, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto. 
286 So dealing with any explosive substance.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
287 So dealing with any machinery.  Ditto  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
288 A person omitting to guard against probable 
danger to human life by the fall of any building 
over which h e has a right entitling him to pull it 
down or repair it.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
289 A person omitting to take order with any 
animal in his possession, so as to guard against 
danger to human life, or of grievous hurt, from 
such animal.  Ditto  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
290 Committing a public nuisance.  Fine of 200 rupees  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
291 Continuance of nuisance after injunction to 
discontinue.  Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
292 Sale, etc., of obs cene books, etc.  On first conviction, with 
imprisonment for 2 years, 
and with fine of 2,000 
rupees, and, in the event of 
second or subsequent 
conviction, with 
imprisonment for five 
years, and with fine of 
5,000 rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
293 Sale, etc., o f obscene objects to young persons.  On first conviction, with 
imprisonment for 3 years, 
and with fine of 2,000 
rupees, and in the event of 
second or subsequent 
conviction, with 
imprisonment for 7 years, 
and with fine of 5,000 
rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
294 Obscene songs  Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine  or  both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
294A  Keeping a lottery office  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine,  or  both.      Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
 Publishing proposals relating to lotteries.  Fine of 1,000 rupe es Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  230 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
CHAPTER XV. –OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION  
295 Destroying, damaging or defiling a place of 
worship or sacred object with intent to insult 
the religion of any class of persons.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine or both.         Cognizable  Non-Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
295A  Maliciously insulting the religion or the 
religious beliefs of any class.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or   fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first class.  
296 Causing a disturbance to an assembly  engaged 
in religious worship.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or   fine, or both.  Ditto 
 Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
297 Trespassing in place of worship or sepulcher, 
disturbing funeral with intention to wound the 
feelings or to insult the religion of any person, 
or offering indignity to a human corpse.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
298 Uttering any word or making any sound in the 
hearing or making any gesture, or placing any 
object in the sight of any person, with intention 
to wound his religious feeling.  Ditto 
        Non-cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
CHAPTER XVI. –OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY  
302 Murder  Death, or imprisonment for 
life, and fine.        Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
303 Murder by a person under sentence of 
imprisonment for life.  Death  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
304 Culpable homicide not amounting to murder, 
if act by which the death is caused is done with 
intention of causing death, etc.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If act is done with knowled ge that it is likely to 
cause death, but without any intention to cause 
death, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 years, 
or fine, or both.   Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
304A  Causing death by rash or negligent act.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 1[304B  Dowry death.  Imprisonment of not less 
than seven years           but 
which may extend to 
imprisonment for life.  Ditto Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
305 Abetment of suicide committed by child, or 
insane or deliriou s person or an idiot, or a 
person intoxicated.  Death, or imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
306 Abetting the commission of suicide.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
307 Attempt to murde r Ditto  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If such act causes hurt to any person.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 Attempt by life -convict to murder, if hurt is 
caused.  Death, or imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
308 Attempt to commit culpable homicide  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If such act causes hurt to any person  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 19.11.1986).  231 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
309 Attempt to comm it suicide .  Simple imprisonment for 1 
year, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
311 Being a thug . Imprisonment for life and 
fine.  Ditto Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
312 Causing miscarriage . Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both . Non-cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 If the woman be quick with child . Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
313 Causing miscarriage without women’s 
consent.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 year s 
and fin e.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
314 Death caused by an act done with intent to 
cause miscarriage.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If act done without women’s consent.  Imprisonment for life, or as 
above.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
315 Act done with intent to prevent a child being 
born alive, or to cause it to die after its birth.  Imprisonment for 10 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
316 Causing death of a quick unborn child by an 
act amounting to culpable homicid e. Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
317 Exposure of a child under 12 years of age by 
parent or person having care of it with 
intention of wholly abandoning it.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Bailable  Magistrate of  
the first class.  
318 Concealment of birth by secret disposal of 
dead body.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
323 Voluntarily causing hurt.  Imprisonment for 1 year or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto  
 Any 
Magistrate.  
324 Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous 
weapons or means.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
325 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt . Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto  Ditto.  
326 Voluntarily causi ng grievous hurt by 
dangerous weapons or means.  Imprisonment for life, or  
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
1[326A  Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of 
acid, etc.  Imprisonment for not less 
than 1 0 years but which 
may extend to 
imprisonment for life and 
fine to be paid to the 
victim.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session  
326B  Voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw 
acid.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
but which may extend to 7 
years and with fine . Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
327 Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property or a 
valuable security, or to constrain to do 
anything which is illegal or which may 
facilitate the commission of an offence.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
328 Administering stupefying drug with intent to 
cause hurt, etc.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
329 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort 
property or a valuable security, or to constrain 
to do anything which is illegal, or which may 
facilitate the commission of an offence.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
330 Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession 
or information, or to compel restoration of 
property, etc.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto 
 Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
331 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort 
confession or information, or to compel 
restoration of  property, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
332 Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public 
servant from his duty.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
or fine or both.  Ditto 
  2[Ditto]  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
333 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter 
public servant from his duty.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  3[Ditto]  Court of 
Session.  
 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42( f)(v), for  “Bailable” in the column 5 relating to s. 332, (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).   
3. Subs . by s. 42( f)(vi), ibid., for “Non -bailable”  in the column 5, relating to s. 333,  (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).   232 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
334 Voluntarily causing hurt on grave and sudden 
provocation, not intending to hurt any other than the 
person who gave the provocation.  Imprisonment for 1 month, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
335 Causing grievous hurt on grave and sudden 
provocation, not intending to hurt any other than the 
person who gave the provocation.  Imprisonment for 4 years, or 
fine of 2,000 rupees, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto Magistrate of the 
first class.  
336 Doing any act which endangers human life or the 
personal safety of others.  Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 250 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
337 Causing hurt by an act which endangers human lif e, 
etc. Imprisonment for 6 months, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
338 Causing grievous hurt by an act which endangers 
human life, etc.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
341 Wrongfully restr aining any person.  Simple imprisonment for 1 
month, or fine of 500 rupees, 
or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
342 Wrongfully confining any person.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
343 Wrongfully confining for three o r more days . Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
344 Wrongfully confining for 10 or more days . Imprisonment for 3 years and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
345 Keeping any person in wrongful confinement, 
knowing that a writ has been i ssued for his liberation.  Imprisonment for 2 years, in 
addition to imprisonment 
under any other section.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of the 
first class.  
346 Wrongful confinement in secret.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
347 Wrongful confinement for the purpose of e xtorting 
property, or constraining to an illegal act, etc.  Imprisonment for 3 years and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
348 Wrongful confinement for the purpose of extorting 
confession or information, or of compelling 
restoration of property, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
352 Assault or use of criminal force otherwise than on 
grave provocation.  Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
353 Assault or use of criminal force to deter a public 
servant from disch arge of his duty.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both.  Cognizable  1[Non -bailable]  Ditto.  
2[354 Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent 
to outrage her modesty.  Imprisonment of 1 year which 
may extend to 5 years, and 
with fine.  Cognizab le Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate  
354A Sexual harassment of the nature of unwelcome 
physical contact and advances or a demand or request 
for sexual favours, showing pornography.  Imprisonment which may 
extend to 3 years or with fine 
or with both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate  
 Sexual harassment of the nature of making sexually 
coloured remark.  Imprisonment which may 
extend to 1 year or with fine or 
with both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
354B  Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent 
to disrobe.  Imprisonment of not less than 
3 years but which may extend 
to 7 years and with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
354C  Voyeurism . Imprisonment of not less than 
1 year but which may extend to 
3 years and with fine for first 
convicti on. Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
  Imprisonment of not less than 
3 years but which may extend 
7 years and with fine for 
second or subsequent 
conviction . Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate  
354D  Stalking . Imprisonment up to 3 years 
and with fine  for first 
conviction.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
  Imprisonment up to 5 years 
and with fine for second or 
subsequent conviction.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate.]  
355 Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonor a 
person, otherwise than on grave and sudden 
provocation.  Ditto  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Ditto.  
356 Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft 
of property worn or carried by a person.  Ditto  
 Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
357 Assault or use of criminal force in attempt 
wrongfully to confine a person.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
358 Assault or use of criminal force on grave and sudden 
provocation.  Simple imprisonment for one 
month, or fine of 200 rupees, 
or both.  Non-cogniz able Ditto  Ditto.  
363 Kidnapping  Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. Cognizable  Ditto  Magistrate of the 
first class.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42  (f) (vii) for “Ditto” in the column 5,  relating to s.  353 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Ac t 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entry  relating to s. 354 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).   233 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
363A  Kidnapping or obtaining the custody of a 
minor in order that such minor may be 
employed or used for purposes of beggi ng. Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  
 Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 Maiming a minor in order that such minor may 
be employed or used for purposes of begging.  Imprisonment for life and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
364 Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder.  Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
1[364A  Kidnapping for ransom, etc.  Death, or imprisonment for 
life and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.]  
365 Kidnapping or abduct ing with intent secretly 
and wrongfully to confine a person.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
366 Kidnapping or abducting a woman to compel 
her marriage or to cause her defilement, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 year s 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
366A  Procuration of a minor girl.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
366B  Importation of a girl from foreign country.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
367 Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject a 
person to grievous hurt, sla very, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
368 Concealing or keeping in confinement a 
kidnapped person.  Punishment for kidnapping 
or abduction.  Ditto  Ditto  Court by 
which the 
kidnapping 
or abduction 
is triable.  
369 Kidnapping or abducting a child with intent to  
take property from the person of such child.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
2[370 Trafficking of person.  Imprisonment of not less 
than 7 years but which may 
extend to 10 years and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Trafficking of more than one person.  Imprisonment of not less 
than 10  years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for 
life and with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Trafficking of a minor.  Imprisonment of not les s 
than 10 years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for 
life and with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Trafficking of more than one minor.  Imprisonment of not less than 14 
years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Person convicted of offence of trafficking of minor 
on more than one occasion.  Imprisonment for life which 
shall mean the remainder of that 
person’s natural life and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Public servant or a police officer involved in 
trafficking of minor.  Imprisonment for life which 
shall mean the remainder of 
that person’s natural life and 
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
370A  Exploitation of a trafficked ch ild. Imprisonment of not less than 5 
years but which may extend to 7 
years and with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Exploitation of a trafficked person.  Imprisonment of not less 
than 3 years but which may 
extend to 5 years and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 4, (w.e.f. 2 2-5-1993).  
2. Subs . by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entries relating to s . 370 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  234 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
371 Habitual dealing in slaves.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for  10 
years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
372 Selling or letting to hire a minor for 
purposes of pros titution, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
373 Buying or obtaining possession of a 
minor for the same purposes.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
374 Unlawful compulsory labour.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
1[ 2[376 Rape .  Rigorous imprisonment of 
not less than 10 years but 
which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and 
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Rape by a police officer or a public 
servant or member of armed forces  or a 
person being on the management or on 
the staff of a jail, remand home or other 
place of custody or women’s or 
children’s institution or by a person on 
the management or on the staff of a 
hospital, and rape committed by a person 
in a position of trust  or authority towards 
the person raped or by a near relative of 
the person raped.  Rigorous imprisonment 
of not less than 10 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life 
which shall mean the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine.  Cogn izable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Persons committing offence of rape on a 
woman under sixteen years of age.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which shall not 
be less than 20 years but 
which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, 
which shall mean 
impriso nment for the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life and  
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
376A Person committing an offence of rape and 
inflicting injury which causes death or 
causes the woman to be in a persistent 
vegetative state.  Rigorous imprisonment 
of not less than 20 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life or 
with death.  Cognizable  
 Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
3[376AB  Person committin g an offence of rape on 
a woman under twelve years of age.  Rigorous imprisonment 
of not less than 20 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine or with death.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session. ] 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entries relating to ss. 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 24, for entr ies relating to section  376 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
3. Ins. by s. 24, ibid.  (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  235 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
376B  Sexual intercourse by husband upon his 
wife during separation.  Imprisonment for not less 
than 2 years but which 
may extend to 7 years 
and with fine.  Cognizable  
 Bailable  Court of 
Session.  
376C  Sexual inte rcourse by a person in 
authority.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 5 years 
but which may extend 
to 10 years and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
376D  Gang rape  Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 20 
years but which may 
exten d to imprisonment 
for life which shall 
mean imprisonment for 
the remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine to be paid to 
the victim.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
1[376DA  Gang rape on a woman under sixteen 
years of age.  Imprisonmen t for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
376DB  Gang rape on woman under twelve years 
of age.  Imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for t he 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine or with death.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
376E  Repeat offenders.  Imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that person’s 
natural life or with death.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
2[377 Unnatural offences  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class. ] 
CHAPTER XVII. –OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY  
379 Theft  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
380 Theft in a building, tent or vessel  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
381 Theft by clerk or servant of property in 
possession of master or employer.  Ditto  
 Ditto  Ditto Ditto.  
382 Theft, after preparation having been 
made for causing death, or hurt, or 
restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of 
restraint, in order to the committing of 
such theft, or to retiring after committing 
it, or to retaining  property taken by it.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
 
 
 
      
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 24 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2001, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for  the entries relating to s. 377 (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  236 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
384 Extortion  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
385 Putting or attempting to put in fear of 
injur y, in order to commit extortion.  Imprisonment for 2 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  
    Bailable  Ditto.  
 
386 Extortion by putting a person in fear of 
death or grievous hurt.  Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  
 Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
387 Putting or attempting to put a person in 
fear of death or grievous hurt in order to 
commit extortion.  Imprisonment for 7 
years and fine.             Ditto  
 Ditto  Ditto.  
388 Extortion by threat of accusation of an 
offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto       Bailable  Ditto.  
 If the offence threatened be an unnatural 
offence.  Imprisonment for life  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
389 Putting a person in fear of accusation o f 
an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years in order to commit extortion.  Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If the offence be an unnatural offence.  Imprisonment for life.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
392 Robbery  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine.  Ditto  
     Non-bailable  Ditto.  
 
 If committed on the highway between 
sunset and sunrise.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 14 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
393 Attempt to commit robbery.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
394 Person voluntarily causing hurt in 
committing or attempting to commit 
robbery, or any other person jointly 
concerned in such robbery.  Imprisonment for life, 
or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years an d fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
395 Dacoity  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
396 Murder in dacoity  Death, imprisonment 
for life, or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
397 Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause 
death or gri evous hurt.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 7 
years.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
398 Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity 
when armed with deadly weapon.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
399 Making preparation to commit dacoity.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years  and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
400 Belonging to a gang of persons 
associated for the purpose of habitually 
committing dacoity.  Imprisonment for life, 
or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
401 Belonging  to a wandering gang of 
persons associated for the purpose of 
habitually committing thefts.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
402 Being one of five or more persons 
assembled for the purpose of committin g 
dacoity.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  237 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
403 Dishonest misappropriation of movable 
property, or converting it to one’s own 
use. Imprisonment for 2 
years, or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
404 Dishonest misappr opriation of property, 
knowing that it was in possession of a 
deceased person at his death, and that it 
has not since been in the possession of 
any person legally entitled to it.  Imprisonment for 3 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class. . 
 If by clerk or person employed by 
deceased  Imprisonment for 7 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 
406 Criminal breach of trust  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or  fine, or both.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Ditto.  
 
407 Criminal breach of trust by a carrier, 
wharfinger, etc.  Imprisonment for 7 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
408 Criminal breach of trust by a clerk or 
servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
409 Criminal breach of trust by public servant 
or by banker, merchant or agent, etc.  Imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
411 Dishonestly receiving stolen property 
knowing it to be stolen.  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
412 Dishonestly receiving stolen property, 
knowing that it was obtained by dacoity.  Imprisonment for life, 
or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
413 Habitually dealing in stolen property.  Imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
414 Assisting in concealment or disposal of 
stolen property, knowing it to be stolen.  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
417 Cheating  Imprisonment for 1 
year, or fine, or both.      Non-cognizable        Bailable  Ditto.  
 
418 Cheating a person whose interest the 
offender was bound, either by law or by 
legal contract, to protect.  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
419 Cheating by personation .  Ditto  
        Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
420 Cheating  and thereby dishonestly 
inducing delivery of property, or the 
making, alteration or destruction of a 
valuable security.  Imprisonment for 7 
years and fine.  Ditto  Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
421 Fraudulent removal or concealment of 
property , etc., to prevent distribution 
among creditors.  Imprisonment for 2 
years, or fine, or both.       Non-cognizable   Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
422 Fraudulently preventing from being made 
available for his creditors a debt or demand 
due to the offender.  Impr isonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.       Non-cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
423 Fraudulent execution of deed of transfer 
containing a false statement of consideration.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
424 Fraudulent removal or concealment of 
property, of himself or any other person or 
assisting in the doing thereof, or dishonestly 
releasing any demand or claim to which he is 
entitled.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  238 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
426 Mischief  Imprisonment for 3 
months or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
427 Mischief, and thereby causing damage to the 
amount of 50 rupees or upwards.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
428 Mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or 
rendering useless any animal of the value of 10 
rupees or upwards.  Ditto         Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
429 Mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or 
rendering useless any elephant, camel, horse, 
etc., whatever may be its value, or any other 
animal of the value of 50 rupees or upwards.  Imprisonment for 5 years, 
or fine , or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
430 Mischief by causing diminution of supply of 
water for agricultural purposes, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
431 Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, 
navigable river, or navigable channel, and  
rendering it impassable or less safe for 
travelling or conveying property.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
432 Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction 
to public drainage attended with damage.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
433 Mischief by destroying or moving or rendering 
less useful a lighthouse or seamark, or by 
exhibiting false lights.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
434 Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a 
landmark fixed by public authority.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.          Non-cognizable  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
435 Mischief by fire or explosive substance with 
intent to cause damage to an amount of 100 
rupees or upwards, or , in case of agricultural 
produce, 10 rupees or upwards.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.          Cognizable  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
436 Mischief by fire or explosive substance with 
intent to destroy a house, etc.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto          Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
437 Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe 
a decked vessel or a vessel of 20 tonnes 
burden.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
438 The mischief described in the last section 
when committed by fire or any explosive 
substance.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
439 Running vessel ashore with intent to commit 
theft, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
440 Mischief committed after preparation made for 
causing d eath, or hurt, etc.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto        Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
447 Criminal trespass  Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
448 House -trespass  Imprisonment for 1  year, 
or fine of 1,000 rupees, or 
both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.   
239 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
449 House -trespass in order to the commission of 
an offence punishable with death.  Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.   Cognizable       Non-baila ble  Court of 
Session.  
450 House -trespass in order to the commission of 
an offence punishable with imprisonment for 
life. Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
451 House -trespass in order to the commission of 
an offence punishable with i mprisonment.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
 If the offence is theft  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto      Non-bailable  Ditto.  
452 House -trespass, having made preparation for 
causing hurt, assault, etc.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto  Ditto.  
453 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
454 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking in 
order to the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment.  Imprisonment for 3 ye ars 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If the offence be theft  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
455 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking after 
preparation made for causing hurt, assault, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
456 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking by 
night.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
457 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking by 
night in order to the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 If the offence is theft  Imprisonment for 14 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
458 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking by 
night, after preparation made for causing hurt, 
etc. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
459 Grievous hurt caused whilst committing 
lurking house -trespass or house -breaking.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
460 Death or grievous hurt caused by one of 
severa l persons jointly concerned in house -
breaking by night, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
461 Dishonestly breaking open or unfastening any 
closed receptacle containing or supposed to 
contain property.  Imprisonment for 2  years 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
462 Being entrusted with any closed receptacle 
containing or supposed to contain any 
property, and fraudulently opening the same.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
or fine, or both.         Ditto          Bailable  Ditto  
CHAPTER XVIII .—OFFENCES RFLATI NG TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS  
465 Forgery  Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both.     Non-cognizable         Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
466 Forgery of a record of a Court of 
Justice or of a Registrar of Births, etc., 
kept by a pub lic servant.  Imprisonment for 7 years and fine  Ditto      Non-bailable  Ditto.  
467 Forgery of a valuable security, will , or 
authority to make or transfer any 
valuable security, or to receive any 
money, etc.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 ye ars and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 When the valuable security is a 
promissory note of the Central 
Government.  Ditto         Cognizable  Ditto Ditto.  
240 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
468 Forgery for the purpose of cheating.  Imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Cognizable   Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
469 Forgery for the purpose of harming the 
reputation of any person or knowing 
that it is likely to be used for that 
purpose.  Imprisonment for 3 years and fine.  Ditto       Bailable  Ditto.  
471 Using as genuine  a forged document 
which is known to be forged.  Punishment for forgery of such 
document.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 When the forged document is a 
promissory note of the Central 
Government.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
472 Making or counterfeiting a seal, plate, 
etc., with intent to commit a forgery 
punishable under section 467 of the 
Indian Penal Code, or possessing with 
like intent any such seal, plate, etc., 
knowing the same to be counterfeit.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto.  
473 Making or counterfeiting a seal, plate, 
etc., with intent to commit a forgery 
punishable otherwise than under section 
467 of the Indian Penal Code, or 
possessing with like intent any such 
seal, plate, etc., knowing the same to be 
counterfeit.  Imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
474 Having possession of a document, 
knowing it to be forged, with intent to 
use it as genuine; if the document is one 
of the description mentioned in section 
466 of the Indian Penal Code.  Ditto.  Ditto. Ditto.  Ditto.  
 If the document is one of the 
description mentioned in section 467 of 
the Indian Penal Code.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine.     Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
475 Counterfeiting a device or mark used 
for authe nticating documents described 
in section 467 of the Indian Penal Code, 
or possessing counterfeit marked 
material.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  
476 Counterfeiting a device or mark used 
for authenticating documents other than 
those described in section 467 o f the 
Indian Penal Code, or possessing 
counterfeit marked material.  Imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Ditto       Non-bailable  Ditto.  
477 Fraudulently destroying or defacing, or 
attempting to destroy or deface, or 
secreting, a will, etc.  Imprisonment for  life, or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto.  Ditto.  
477A  Falsification of accounts . Imprisonment for 7 years or fine, 
or both.  Ditto        Bailable  Ditto.  
482 Using a false property mark with intent 
to deceive or injure any person.  Imprison ment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto  Ditto         Any 
Magistrate.  
483 Counterfeiting a property mark used by 
another, with intent to cause damage or 
injury.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
484 Counterfeiting a property mark used by 
a public servant, or any mark used by 
him to denote the manufacture, quality, 
etc., of any property.  Imprisonment for 3 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
485 Fraudulently making or having 
possession of any die, plate  or other 
instrument for counterfeiting any 
public or private property mark.  Imprisonment for 3 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  241 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
486 Knowingly selling goods marked 
with a counterfeit property mark.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or f ine, 
or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  
 Any 
Magistrate.  
487 Fraudulently making a false mark 
upon any package or receptacle 
containing goods, with intent to 
cause it to be believed that it contains 
goods, which it does not contain, etc.  Imprisonment for 3 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
488 Making use of any such false mark.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
489 Removing, destroying or defacing 
property mark with intent to cause 
injury.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
489A Counterfeiting currency -notes or 
bank -notes.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine.         Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
489B  Using as genuine forged or 
counterfeit currency -notes or bank -
notes.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
489C  Possession of forged or counterfeit 
currency -notes or bank -notes.  Imprisonment for 7 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto           Bailable  Ditto.  
489D  Making or possessing machinery, 
instrument or material for forging or 
counterfeiting currency -notes or 
bank -notes.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. Ditto         Non-bailable  Ditto.  
489E  Making or using documents 
resembling currency -notes or bank -
notes.  Fine of 100 rupees.       Non-cognizable          Bailable  Any 
Magi strate.  
 On refusal to disclose the name and 
address of the printer.  Fine of 200 rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
CHAPTER  XIX. —CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE  
491  Being bound to attend on or supply the 
wants of a person who is helpless from 
youth, uns oundness of mind or 
disease, and voluntarily omitting to do 
so. Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 200 rupees, or both.         Non-cognizable         Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
CHAPTER  XX.—OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE  
493 A man by deceit causing a woma n not 
lawfully married to him to believe, 
that she is lawfully married to him  
and to cohabit with him in that belief.  Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine.        Non-cognizable        Non-bailable  Magistrate 
of the first 
class.  
494 Marrying again during the life time of 
a husband or wife.  Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. Ditto       Bailable  Ditto.  
495 Same offence with concealment of the 
former marriage from the person with 
whom subsequent marriage is 
contracted.  Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. Ditto Ditto  Ditto . 
496 A person with fraudulent intention 
going through the ceremony of being 
married, knowing that he is not 
thereby lawfully married.  Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
497 Adultery  Imprisonment for 5 years, or 
fine, o r both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
498 Enticing or taking away or detaining 
with a criminal intent a married 
woman.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  242 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
1[CHAPTER  XXA. —OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND  
498A  Punishment for subjecting a married 
woman to cruelty.  Imprisonment for three years and 
fine. Cognizable if 
information relating 
to the commission of 
the offence is given 
to an officer  in 
charge of a police 
station by the person 
aggrieved by the 
offen ce or by any 
person related to her 
by blood, marriage  
or adoption or if there 
is no such relative, by 
any public servant 
belonging to such 
class or category as 
may be notified by 
the State Government 
in this behalf.    Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.]  
CHAPTER  XXI. —DEFAMATION  
500 Defamation against the President or the 
Vice -President or the Governor of a 
State or Administrator of a Union 
territory or a Minister in respect of his 
conduct in the discharge of his public 
functions when instituted up on a 
complaint made by the Public 
Prosecutor.  Simple imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.       Non-cognizable            Bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Defamation in any other case  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
501(a) Printing or engraving matter knowing 
it to be defamatory against the 
President or the Vice -President or the 
Governor of a State or Administrator 
of a Union territory or a Minister in 
respect of his conduct in the discharge 
of his public functions when instituted 
upon a complaint made by the Public 
Prosecutor.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
     (b) Printing or engraving matter knowing 
it to be defamatory, in any other case.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
502(a) Sale of printed or engraved subst ance 
containing defamatory matter, 
knowing it to  contain such matter 
against the President or the Vice -
President or the Governor of a State or 
Administrator of a Union territory or a 
Minister in respect of his conduct in 
the discharge of his public functi ons 
when instituted upon a complaint 
made by the Public Prosecutor.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
     (b) Sale of printed or engraved substance 
containing defamatory matter, 
knowing it to contain such matter in 
any other case.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class . 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 6 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  243 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
CHAPTER  XXII. —CRIMINAL INTIMIDATIONS, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE  
504 Insult intended to provoke breach of the 
peace.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both.      Non-cognizable         Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
505 False statement, rumour, etc., circulated 
with intent to cause mutiny or offence 
against the public peace.  Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto       Non-bailable  Ditto. 
 False statement, rumour, etc., with 
intent to create enmity, hatred or il l- 
will between different classes.  Ditto       Cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
 False statement, rumour, etc., made in 
place of worship, etc., with intent to 
create enmity, hatred or ill -will. Imprisonment for 5 years and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
506 Criminal i ntimidation . Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both.       Non-cognizable       Bailable  Ditto. 
 If threat be to cause death or grievous 
hurt, etc.  Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
507 Criminal in timidation by anonymous 
communication or having taken 
precaution to conceal whence the threat 
comes.  Imprisonment for 2 years, in 
addition to the punishment under 
above section.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
508 Act caused by inducing a person to 
believe that he wil l be rendered an 
object of Divine displeasure.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate.  
509 Uttering any word or making any 
gesture intended to insult the modesty 
of a woman, etc.  1[Simple imprisonment for 3 years 
and with fi ne.]        Cognizable   Ditto Ditto. 
510 Appearing in a public place, etc., in a 
state of intoxication, and causing 
annoyance to any person.  Simple imprisonment for 24 hours, 
or fine of 10 rupees, or both.        Non-cognizable   Ditto Ditto. 
CHAPTER  XXIII.—ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES  
511 Attempting to commit offences 
punishable with imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment, and in such attempt 
doing any act towards the commission 
of the offence.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment not exceeding 
half.of the longest term, provided 
for the offence, or fine, or both  According as the 
offence is cognizable 
or non -cognizable.  According as the 
offence attempted 
by the offender is 
bailable or not.  The court by 
which the 
offence 
attempted is 
triable.  
 
II.—CLASSIF ICATION OF OFFENCES AGAINST OTHER LAWS  
 
Offence  Cognizable 
or non -
cognizable  Bailable or non -
bailable  By what court triable  
If punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for more than 7 years  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of Session.  
If punishable with  imprisonment for 3 years and upwards but not  more than 7 years  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
If punishable with  imprisonment for less than 3 years or with fine only.  Non-
cognizable  Bailable  Any Magistrate.  
 
 
 
                                                 
1. Subs . by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24,  for the word “Simple imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both ,” occurring made in column 3, 
relating to s. 509  (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  244 
 STATE AMEND MENT S 
Chhattisgarh  
In First Schedule to the Code, under the heading “1. —OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE,       
1860 ” — 
(a) In the entries relating to Section 211, the following entries shall be added, namely:  — 
 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable or 
non-
bailable  By what Court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
... If offence charged be punishable under Ss. 
354, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D, 354E, 376B, 
376C, 376F, 509, 509A or 509B.  Imprisonment not less than 
3 years but which m ay 
extend to 5 years and fine.  Non-Cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
(b) In the entries relating to Section 354, the following entries shall be added, namely:  — 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable 
or non -
baila ble By what 
Court triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
... If committed by relative of the woman.  Imprisonment not less 
than 2 years but which 
may extend to 7 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Non-
Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 (C) After the entries relat ing to Section 354D, the following shall be inserted, namely:  — 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable 
or non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
354E  Liability of person present who fails to 
prevent the commi ssion of offence under 
Ss. 354, 354A, 354B, 354C or 354D.  
 Imprisonment upto 3 
years or fine or both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
(d) After the entries relating of Section 376E, the following shall be inserted, namely:  — 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable 
or non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
376F  Liability of person in -charge of any work 
place and others to give information 
about offence.  Imprisonment upto 3 
years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-
Bailable  Magistrate of 
first class.  245 
  
(e) After the entries relating to Section 509, the following shall be inserted, namely:  — 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable 
or non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
509A Sexual harassment by relative.  Rigorous imprisonment 
not less than 1 year but 
which may extend upto 
5 years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-
Bailable  Magistrate of 
first class.  
509B  Sexual harassment by electronic modes.  Rigorous imprisonment 
not less than 6 m onths 
but which may extend 
upto 2 years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-
Bailable  Magistrate of 
first class,]  
 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 13]  
 
Gujarat  
In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in the First Schedule, in the table, under the heading “Chapter XVII -Offences against 
Property ”, after section 379, the following shall be inserted, namely:  — 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable  Bailable or Non -
bailable  By what court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
“379A  Attempt to commit 
snatching  Rigorous 
imprisonment of not 
less than five years 
but which may 
extend to ten years, 
and fine of 25,000 
rupees.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of Session  
 Committing 
snatching  Rigorous 
imprisonment of not 
less than seven years 
but which may 
extend to ten years, 
and fine of 25,000 
rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 Causing hurt or 
wrongful restraint or 
fear of hurt, in order 
to effect escape after 
attempting to commit 
or after committing 
snatching  Rigorous 
imprisonment which 
may extend to three 
years, in a ddition to 
punishment under 
other sub -sections.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
379B  Snatching, after 
preparation having 
been made for 
causing death, or 
hurt, or restraint, in Rigorous 
imprisonment f not 
less than seven years 
but which may 
extend to ten year, Ditto  Ditto  Ditto. ”. 246 
 order to the 
committing of such 
snatching, or to 
retaining property 
taken by it.  and fine of 25,000 
rupees.  
 
[Vide Gujrat Act 6 of 2019, s. 3 .] 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of First Schedule. - In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the  heading “I -
OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, after the entries relating to section 354, the 
following entries shall be inserted, namely: - 
 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable  Bailable or Non -
bailable  By what court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
“354-A Assault or use of 
Criminal force to 
woma n with intent 
to disrobe her.  Imprisonment of 
not less than one 
year but which 
may extend to ten 
years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of Session ” 
 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh  Act 15 of 200 4, s. 5.] 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of the First Schedule. —In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the heading               
“I-Offences under the Indian Penal Code ”, in column 6 against section 317, 318, 326, 363, 363A, 365, 
377, 392, 393, 394, 4 09, 435, 466, 467, 468, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477 and 477A, for the words, 
“Magistrate of the first class ”, wherever they occur, the  words “Court of Session ” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 2008, s. 4.]  
Maharashtra  
In the Firs t Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure,  under heading “I, - OFFENCE S UNDER 
THE INDIAN PENAL COD E”,-  
(i) for the entry relating to section 332, the following entry shall be substituted, namely: — 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable  Bailable or 
Non-bailable  By what court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
“332 Voluntarily 
causing hurt to 
deter public 
servant from his 
duty.  Imprisonment 
for 5  years or 
fine, or both . Cognizable  Non- bailable  Court of 
Session.”;  
 247 
 (ii) for the entry rela ting to section 353, the following entry shall be substituted, namely: — 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
Non-
cognizable  Bailable or 
Non-bailable  By what court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
“353 Assault or use of 
criminal force to 
deter a public  servant 
from discharge of his 
duty.  Imprisonment 
for five years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session. ”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2018, s. 5]  
Haryana  
1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Haryana Amendment) A ct, 2014 . 
 Short title  
2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in its application to the State of Haryana, in the 
First Schedule, in the table, after section 379, the following entries shall be inserted, 
namely: —   Amendment 
of First 
Schedule to 
Centra l Act 2 
of 1974  
 1 2 3 4 5 6  
 “379-A Snatching  Rigorous 
imprisonment for a 
term which shall 
not be less than 
five years but 
which may extend 
to ten years, and 
fine of Rs. 
25,000/ - Cognizable  Non-
bailable  
 Court of 
Session 
  
 379-B Snatching 
with hurt o r 
wrongful 
restraint or 
fear of hurt.  Rigorous 
imprisonment for a 
term which shall 
not be less than ten 
years and which 
may extend to 
fourteen years, and 
fine of Rs. 
25,000 /-            
Ditto  
               
Ditto         
Ditto”.   
[Vide Notification No. GSR 929(E) dated 16th December, 2019. ] 248 
 Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Central Act No. 2 of 1974. —In the First Schedule to the   Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
under the heading “1. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE” after the entries relating to section 304-
A, the following entries shall be inserted, namely: — 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
“304-AA Causing death or 
injury by driving 
a public service 
vehicle while in 
a state of 
intoxication  Imprisonment 
for life, or 
imprisonment 
for seven years 
and fine  Ditto  Non-bailable   Court of   
Session ” 
[Vide Himachal Pradesh 19 of 1997, s. 3 .] 
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Central Act No. 2 of 1974.  — In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
under the heading “I, OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, after th e entries relating to section 289, 
the following entries shall be inserted, namely: — 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
“289-A Whoever throws eatables in 
public place, other than 
those notified by the State 
Government in the Official 
Gazette, and thereby entice 
monkeys to assem ble at 
such place for taking 
eatables which result in 
causing danger to human 
life or to be likely to cause 
injury or annoyance to the 
public or to the people in 
general or to cause 
hindrance in smooth 
running of vehicular traffic.  Imprisonment for 
one mon th or fine 
of Rs. 1000/ - or 
both Ditto  Ditto   
Ditto.  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 2006, s. 3]  
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Central Act No. 2 of 1947.  —In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, under the heading “ OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, in its application to the  State of 
Himachal Pradesh, against the entries relating to section 304 -AA, under column 2, for the words “a public service 
vehicle”, the words “any vehicle” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act  7 of 2012, s. 3.]   
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). — 
1  2 3 4 5  
354E  Sextortion  Imprisonment of 
not 
less than 3 years 
but 
which may extend 
to 
five years and with  
fine. Cognizable  
 Non-bailable  Magistrate  
of the First  
Class  249 
 [vide the Jammu and Kash mir Reorganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O . 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020).]  
Orissa  
Amendment of First Schedule .—In the First Schedule to the said Code, in the entry under  column 5 
relating to section  354 of the Ind ian Penal Code, 1860  (45 of 1860)  for the word “Bailable” the word 
“non -bailable” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 1995, s. 3]  
Amendment of First Schedule .— In the first Schedule to the principal Act, for the existing entries relating to 
section s 272, 273,274, 275 and 276, the following entries shall respectively be substituted ,  namely: — 
 
Section                                                                            
                                                                                                             Offence   Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable              Bailable  non -
bailable            
or                 By what Court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
272.              
                  
            Adulterati ng  food or drink 
intended         For sale, or as 
to make the same        
noxious.  Imprisonment for  
life and fine.       Cognizable    Non-bailable        Court of 
Session.  
273. Selling any food or drink as 
food and drink, knowing the 
same to be noxious . Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
274. Adulterating any drug or 
medical Preparation 
intended for sale so as to 
Lessen its efficacy, or to 
change its Operation, or to 
make it noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
275. Offering for sale or 
issuing from a 
dispensary and  drug or 
medical preparation 
known to have been 
adulterated.  Imprisonment 
for life and fine  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court for 
session.  
276.  knowingly selling or 
issuing from A 
dispensary and drug or 
medical Preparation as 
a different drug or 
medical prep aration.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 2004, s. 3]  250 
 Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of First Schedule, Central Act 2 of 1974. - In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in the First 
Schedule, under the heading captioned “I -Offences u nder the Indian Penal Code”, - 
(i) against the entry relating to section 354 in column 3 for the expression “imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or 
both”, the expression , “imprisonment for 7 years and fine”, and in column 5 for the word “Bailable”, the word s 
“Non -bailable”, and in column 6 for the words “any Magistrate”, the words “court of session”, shall respectively be 
substituted;  
(ii) against the entries relating to section 355 in column 3 for the word “Ditto” the expression “imprisonment for 
2 years, o r fine or both”, and in column 5 for the word “Ditto”, the word “Bailable” and in column 6 for the word 
“Ditto”, the words “Any Magistrate”, shall respectively be substituted;  
(iii) against the entries relating to section 494 in column 4 for the word “Ditt o”, the word “cognizable” and in 
column 5 for the word “Bailable”, the words “Non -bailable” shall respectively be substituted;  
(iv) against the entries relating to section 495 in column 4 for the word “Ditto”, the word “cognizable” and in 
column 5 for the word “Ditto”, the words “Non -bailable” shall respectively be substituted;  
(v) against the entries relating to section 496 in column 4 for the word “Ditto”, the word “Cognizable” and in 
column 5 for the word “Ditto”, the words “Non -bailable” shall respectiv ely be substituted;  
(vi) against the entries relating to section 497 in column 4 for the word “Ditto”, the words “Non -cognizable” 
and in column 5 for the word “Ditto”, the word “Bailable” shall respectively be substituted.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 3 of 199 2, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of the First Schedule to Act no. 2 of 1974 . –In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
in the First Schedule, for the existing entries against sections 272, 273, 274, 275 and 276, the following 
entries shall be substituted i n Columns 2,3,4,5 and 6 respectively, namely :-- 
‘‘272 Adulterating food or drink 
intended for sale, so as to 
make the same noxious.  Imprisonment for 
life, with or 
without fine.  Cognizable  Non- 
bailable  Court of 
session  
273 Selling any food or drink 
as foo d and drink, knowing 
the same to be noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
274 Adulterating any drug or 
medical preparation 
intended for sale so as to 
lessen its efficacy, or to 
make it noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
275 Offering for sale or issuing 
from a dispensary any 
drug or medical 
preparation known to have 
been adulterated.  Imprisonment for 
life, with or 
without fine.  Cognizable  
 Non- 
bailable  Court of 
session  
276 Knowingly selling or 
issuing from a dispensary 
any drug or medical 
preparation as a diff erent 
drug or medical 
preparation  Ditto   
 Ditto  Ditto   
 Ditto  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh  Act 47 of 1975, s. 4]  251 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In the First Schedule to the said Code, in the entries relating to section 363 of the Indian Penal Code, 
in column 5, for the existin g words, the words “Non -bailable” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 12] 
 
 
 
 
 
 252 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 476)  
FORM No. 1  
SUMMONS TO AN ACCUSED PERSON  
(See section 61)  
To      ( name of accused ) of ( address ) 
 
WHEREAS  your att endance is necessary to answer to a charge of                                                 ( state 
shortly the offence charged ), you are hereby required to appear in person ( or by pleader, as the case may  
be) before the ( Magistrate ) of                      , on the               day                         . Herein fail not.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
________________  
 
FORM N o. 2 
WARRRANT OF ARREST  
(See section 70)  
To      ( name and designation of the person or pers ons who is or are to execute the warrant ). 
WHEREAS  (name of accused ) of ( address ) stands charged with the offence of             ( state the  
offence ), you are hereby directed to arrest the said                                                  , and to produ ce 
him before me. Herein fail not.  
 
Dated, this  day of      ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
(See section 71)  
This warrant may be endorsed as follows: — 
 
If the said                                                                                      shall give bail himself in the sum 
of rupees                                                      with one surety in the sum of rupees                               (or two 
sureties each in the sum of rupees                 ) to attend before me on th e                   day of                  and 
to continue so to attend until otherwise directed by me, he may be released.  
 
Dated, this                     day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court )  (Signature ) 
________________  253 FORM N o. 3 
BOND AND BAIL -BOND  AFTER ARREST UNDER A WARRANT  
(See section 81)  
I,                                            (name ), of                                                              ,being brought before 
the District Magistrate of                                                                 (or as the case may be ) under a warrant 
issued to compel my appearance to answer to the charge of                               , do hereby bind myself to 
attend in the Court of                                       on the                 day of                   next, to answer to the 
said charge, and to continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the Court; and, in case of my making 
default herein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees         
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
 
I do hereby declare myself surety for the above -named                              of                                that 
he shall attend before                                                                                                        in the Court of on 
the                                    day of                                                      next, to answer to the cha rge on which 
he has been arrested, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise direc ted by the Court; and, in case of 
his making default therein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature )    
      ________________  
 
FORM N o. 4 
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON AC CUSED  
(See section 82)  
WHEREAS  a complaint has been made before me that                               ( name, description and 
address ) has committed ( or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                                         , 
punishable unde r section                    of the Indian Penal Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of 
arrest thereupon issued that the said                                            ( name ) cannot be found, and whereas it 
has been shown to my satisfaction that t he said                   ( name ) has absconded ( or is concealing 
himself to avoid the service of the said warranty);  
 
Proclamation is hereby made that the said                                          of                        is required to 
appear at                                              (place ) before this Court ( or before me) to answer the said 
complaint on the                day of                    
 
Dated, this  day of      ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
________________254 FORM N o. 5 
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS  
(See sections 82, 87 and 90)  
 
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before me that                                           ( name, description and 
address ) has committed ( or is suspected to have committed) the of fence of                               ( mention  
the offence concisely ) and a warrant has been issued to compel the attendance                                                       
of                                 ( name , description and address of the wit ness) before this Court to be examined 
touching the matter of the said complaint; and whereas it has been returned to the said warrant that                   
the said                                            ( name of witness ) cannot be served, and it has  been shown to my 
satisfaction that he has absconded ( or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant);  
 
Proclamation is hereby made that the said                                                                 ( name ) is required 
to appea r at                          ( place ) before the Court                                     on the                               day 
of                                  next at                        o’clock to be examined touching                                the 
offence complained of.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
________________  
 
FORM N o. 6 
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS  
(See section 83)  
To the officer in charge of the police station at  
 
WHERE AS a warrant has been duly issued to compel the attendance of                ( name, description 
and address ) to testify concerning a complaint pending before this Court, and it has been returned to the 
said warrant that it cannot be served; and whereas it has been shown to my satisfaction that he has 
absconded ( or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant); and thereupon a 
Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said                              to 
appe ar and give evidence at the time and place mentioned therein;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure the movable property belonging to the                
said                                       to the value of rupees                                     which you may find within the 
District                                 of                            and to hold the said property under attachment pending  
the further order of this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court )  (Signature ) 
________________255 FORM No. 7  
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED  
(See section 83)  
To  
      (name and designation of the per son or persons who is or are to execute the warrant ). 
 
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before me that                                                ( name, description 
and address ) has committed ( or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                       punishable 
under section                               of the Indian Penal Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest 
thereupon issued that the said                              ( name ) cannot be found; and whereas it has been shown 
to my satisfaction that the said                                      ( name ) has absconded ( or is concealing himself               
to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation has been or is being duly issued 
and published requirin g the said                                                                  to appear to answer the said 
charge within                       days; and whereas the said                            is possessed of the following 
property, other than land payin g revenue to Government, in the village ( or town), of                              , in 
the District of                            , viz.,                      , and an order has been made for the attachment 
thereof;  
 
You are hereby required to attach the said property in the manner specified in clause ( a), or clause ( c), 
or both*, of sub -section ( 2) of section 83, and to hold the same under attachment pending further order of 
this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court )  (Signature ) 
__________________________________________________________________________  
* Strike out the one which is not applicable, depending on the nature of the property to be attache d. 
_______________  
FORM N o. 8 
ORDER AUTHORISING AN ATTACHMENT BY THE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE OR COLLECTOR  
(See section 83)  
 
To the District Magistrate/Collector of the District of  
  
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before me that                             ( name, description and address ) 
has committed ( or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                     , punishable under              
section              of the Indian Penal Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon              
issued that the said                                             ( name ) cannot be found; and whereas it has been                     
shown to my satisfaction that the said                    ( name ) has absconded (or is concealing                            
himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation has been or is being duly 
issued and published requiring the said            ( name ) to appear to answer the said charge                            
within                             days; and whereas the said                         is possessed of certain land paying 
revenue to Government in the village ( or town ) of                        , in the District of                                    ; 
 
You are hereby authorise d and requested to cause the said land to be attached, in the manner specified 
in clause ( a), or clause ( c), or both*, of sub -section ( 4) of section 83, and to be held under attachment 
pending the further order of this Court, and to certify without delay w hat you may have done in pursuance 
of this order.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________________________________________________________________________________  
* Strike out the one which is not desired.256 FORM N o. 9 
WARRANT IN THE FIRST INSTANCE TO BRING UP A WITNESS  
(See section 87)  
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant ). 
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before me that                              ( name and description                      
of accused )  of            ( address ) has ( or is suspected to have ) committed the offence of              ( mention 
the offence concisely ), and it appears likely that                                       ( name and d escription of witness ) 
can give evidence concerning the said complaint, and whereas I have good and sufficient reason to 
believe that he will not attend as a witness on the hearing of the said complaint unless compelled to do so;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to arrest the said                                            ( name of witness ), 
and on the                     day of                     to bring him before this Court                            , to be 
examined touching the offence complaine d of. 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature )                  
_______________  
 
FORM N o. 10 
WARRANT TO SEARCH AFTER INFORMATION OF A PARTICULAR OFFENCE  
(See section 93)  
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person  or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant ). 
WHEREAS  information has been laid                                         ( or complaint has been made ) before 
me of the commission                                                                    ( or suspected commission) of the offence 
of                             ( mention the offence concisely ), and it has been made to appear to me that the 
production of                                                 ( specify the thing clearly ) is essential to the in quiry now 
being made ( or about to be made) into the said offence ( or suspected offence);  
 
This is to authorise and require you to search for the said                                       ( the thing specified ) 
in the                                                 (describe the house or place or part thereof to which the search is to 
be confined ), and, if found, to produce the same forthwith before this Court, returning this warrant, with 
an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately up on its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court )  (Signature ) 
_______________257 FORM N o. 11 
WARRANT TO SEARCH SUSPECTED PLACE OF DEPOSIT  
(See section 94)  
To  
       (name and designation of the police officer above the rank of a constable ). 
 
WHEREAS  information has been laid before me, and on due inquiry thereupon had, I have been led to 
believe that the                                              ( describe the house or other place ) is used as a place for the 
deposit ( or sale) of stolen pr operty ( or if for either of the other purposes expressed in the section, state the 
purpose in the words of the section ); 
This is to authorise and require you to enter the said house ( or other place ) with such assistance as 
shall be required, and to use, if  necessary, reasonable force for that purpose, and to search every part of 
the said house ( or other place, or if the search is to be confined to a part, specify the part clearly ), and to 
seize and take possession of any property ( or documents, or stamps, or seals, or coins, or obscene 
objects, as the case may be ) (add, when the case requires it ) and also of any instruments and materials 
which you may reasonably believe to be kept for the manufacture of forged documents, or counterfeit 
stamps, or false seals , or counterfeit coins or counterfeit currency notes ( as the case may be ), and 
forthwith to bring before this Court such of the said things as may be taken possession of, returning this 
warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, i mmediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________  
 
FORM N o. 12 
BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE  
(See sections 106 and 107)  
WHEREAS  I,                                                 ( name ), inhabitant of                                             (place ), 
have been called upon to enter into a bond to keep the peace for the term of                                    or until 
the completion of the inquiry in the matter of                                                     now pending in the Court 
of                                               , I hereby bind myself not to commit a breach of the peace, or do any act 
that may probably occasion a breach of the peace, during the said term or until the completio n of the said 
inquiry and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum 
of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
_______________258 FORM N o. 13 
BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
(See sections 108, 109 and 11 0) 
 
WHEREAS  I,                                    ( name ), inhabitant of                                                      ( place ), 
have been called upon to enter into a bond to be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens                 
of India for the term of ( state the period ) or until the completion of the inquiry in the matter                                
of                              now pending in the Court of                                         , I hereby bind myself to  be of 
good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term or until the completion of 
the said inquiry; and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit to Government 
the sum of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
 
(Where a bond with sureties is to be executed, add ) 
We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above -named  
that he will be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term or until 
the completion of the said inquiry; and, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves, jointly 
and severally, to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees                        
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
_______________  
 
FORM No. 14  
SUMMONS ON  INFORMATION OF A PROBABLE BREACH OF THE PEACE  
(See section 113)  
To                                     of    
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me by credible information that                                   ( state 
the substance of the information ), and that you are likely to commit a breach of the peace ( or by which  
act a breach of the peace will probably be occasioned), you are hereby required to attend in person ( or   
by a duly authorised agent) at the office of the Magistrate of                 o n the            day of          19        , 
at ten o’clock in the forenoon, to show cause why you should not be required to enter into a bond for 
rupees                   [ when sureties are required, add , and also to give security by the bond of one ( or two, 
as the case may be ) surety ( or sureties ) in the sum of rupees                    (each if more than one )], that you 
will keep the peace for the term of  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________259 FORM No. 15  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY TO KEEP THE PEACE  
(See section 122)  
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                                                           (name and address ) appeared before me in person                
(or by his authorised agent) on the                       day of                              in obedience to a summons 
calling upon him to show cause why he should not enter into a bond for rupees                          with one 
surety ( or a bond with two sure ties each in rupees                   ), that he, the said                               ( name ) 
would keep the peace for the period of months; and whereas an order was then made requiring the                 
said                                        ( name) to enter into and find such security                                           ( state 
the security ordered when it differs from that mentioned in the summons ), and he has failed to comply 
with the said order;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to rec eive the said                                   ( name ) into your custody, 
together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period                                              
of                                                 (term of imprisonment ) unless he shall in the meantime be lawfully 
ordered to be released, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________ __ 
FORM No. 16  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
(See section 122)  
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that                                             ( name and description ) 
has been concealing his presence within the district of                                                   and that there is 
reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence;  
or 
WHEREAS  evidence of the general character of                                                   ( name and description ) 
has been adduced before me and recorded, from which it appears that he is an habitual robber ( or                  
house -breaker, etc., as the case may be ); 
 
AND WHEREAS an order ha s been recorded stating the same and requiring the said ( name ) to furnish 
security for his good behaviour for the term of ( state the period ) by entering into a bond with one surety 
(or two or more sureties, as the case may be ), himself for rupees                                                    , and the 
said surety (or each of the said sureties) rupees                         , and the said                               ( name )  
has failed to comply with the said order and for such default has been adjudg ed imprisonment for ( state 
the term ) unless the said security be sooner furnished;  
 
This is to authorise and require you receive the said                                            ( name ) into your 
custody, together with this warrant and him safely to keep  in the Jail, or if he is already in prison, be 
detained therein, for the said period of ( term of imprisonment ) unless he shall in the meantime be lawfully 
ordered to be released , and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution.  
 
Dated , this day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________260 FORM No. 17  
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY  
(See sections 122 and 123)  
 
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at                      (or other officer in whose custody the person is).  
 
WHEREAS                                                (name and description of prisoner ) was committed to your 
custody under warrant of the Court, dated the                          day of                         19                   ; and 
has since duly given security under section                 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
 
or 
 
WHEREAS                               (name and description of prisoner ) was committed to your custody 
under wa rrant of the Court, dated the                              day of                                 19          ; and there 
have appeared to me sufficient grounds for the opinion that he can be released without hazard to the 
community;  
 
This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said                                 ( name ) from 
your custody unless he is liable to be detained for some other cause.  
 
Dated, this  day of   ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________  
FORM No. 18  
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY MAINTENANCE  
(See section 125)  
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                                               (name, description and address ) has been proved before me 
to be possessed of sufficient means  to maintain his wife                                                      ( name ) [or his      
child                              ( name ) or his father or mother                                        ( name ), who is by              
reason of ( state the reas on) unable to maintain herself ( or himself)] and to have neglected ( or refused) to 
do so, and an order has been duly made requiring the said                                       ( name ) to allow to          
his said                                     wife  (or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of 
rupees                              ; and whereas it has been further proved that the said                               ( name ) 
in wilful disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupee s                             , being the amount of the 
allowance for the month ( or months) of                                  ;  
 
And thereupon an order was made adjudging him to undergo imprisonment in the said Jail for the 
period of                           ; 
 
This is to authorise and require you receive the said                                  ( name ) into your custody in 
the said Jail, together with this warrant, and there carry the said order into execution according to law, 
returning this warrant wi th an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
______________261 FORM No. 19  
WARRANT TO ENFORCE THE PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE  
(See section 125)  
To 
(name and designa tion of the police officer or other person to execute the warrant ). 
WHEREAS  an order has been duly made requiring                                                            ( name ) to 
allow to his said wife ( or child or father or mother) for maintenance the  monthly sum of                   
rupees                                          , and whereas the said                                              ( name ) in wilful 
disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees                                  , b eing the amount of the 
allowance for the month ( or months) of  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property belonging to the                             
said                                  ( name ) which may be found within the dist rict of                                   , and if 
within                                     ( state the number of days or hours allowed )                              next after 
such attachment the said sum shall not be paid ( or forthwith ), to sell the mov able property attached, or so 
much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said sum, returning this warrant, with an endorsement 
certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
______________  
FORM No. 20  
ORDER FOR THE REMOVAL OF NUISANCES  
(See section 133)  
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you have caused an obstruction                                
(or nuisance) to persons using the public roadway ( or other public place) which, etc., ( describe the road 
or public place )                       by, etc., ( state what it is that causes the obstruction or nuisance ), and that 
such obstruction ( or nuisance) still exi sts; 
or 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you are carrying on, as owner, or manager, the              
trade or occupation of                                                 ( state the particular trade or occupation and the 
place where it is car ried on ), and that the same is injurious to the public health ( or comfort) by                 
reason                               ( state briefly in what manner the injurious effects are caused ), and should be 
suppressed or removed to different place;  
or 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you are the owner ( or are in possession of                          
or have the control over) a certain tank ( or well or excavation) adjacent to the public way ( describe the 
thoroughfare ), and that the safety of  the public is endangered by reason of the said tank ( or well                          
or excavation) being without a fence or insecurely fenced);  
or 
WHEREAS , etc., etc., ( as the case may be ); 262 I do hereby direct and require you within                                          (state the time allowed ) (state 
what is required to be done to abate the nuisance )                                                                    or to appear 
at                   in the                    Court of                        on the                 day of                                  next, 
and to show cause why this order should not be enforced;  
or 
I do hereby direct and require you within                                 ( state the time allowed ) to cease 
carrying on t he said trade or occupation at the said place, and not again to carry on the same, or to remove 
the said trade from the place where it is now carried on, or to appear, etc.;  
or 
I do hereby direct and require you within                                                   (state the time allowed ) to 
put up a sufficient fence ( state the kind of fence and the part to be fenced ); or to appear, etc.;  
or 
I do hereby direct and require you, etc., etc. ( as the case may be ). 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
______________  
FORM No. 21  
MAGISTRATE’S NOTICE AND PEREMPTORY ORDER  
(See section 141)  
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
I HEREBY  give you notice that it has been found that the order issued on the                                     day 
of                             requiring you ( state substantially the requisition in the order ) is reasonable and 
proper.  Such order has been made absolute, and I hereby direct and require you to obey the said order 
within ( state the time allo wed), on peril of the penalty provided by the Indian Penal Code for 
disobedience thereto.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
______________  
FORM No. 22  
INJUNCTION TO PROVIDE AGAINST IMMINENT DANGER PENDING INQUIRY  
(See section 14 2) 
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
 
WHEREAS  the inquiry into the conditional order issued by me on the             day of         ,19          , is  
pending, and it has been made to appear to me that the nuisance mentioned in the said order i s attended 
with such imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public as to render necessary immediate 
measures to prevent such danger or injury, I do hereby, under the provisions of section 142 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, direct and enjoin you forthwith to ( state plainly what is required to be done as 
a temporary safeguard ), pending the result of the inquiry.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________263 FORM No. 23  
MAGISTRATE’S ORDER PROHIBITING THE REP ETITION, ETC., OF A NUISANCE  
(See section 143)  
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that, etc. ( state the proper recital, guided by  Form No. 20 
or Form No. 24, as the case may be ); 
 
I do hereby strictly or der and enjoin you not to repeat or continue, the said nuisance.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 24  
MAGISTRATE’S ORDER TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION, RIOT, ETC.  
(See section 144)  
 
To          ( name, descriptio n and address ). 
 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you are in possession ( or have the management) of 
(describe clearly the property ), and that, in digging a drain on the said land, you are about to throw or 
place a portion of the earth and ston es dug -up upon the adjoining public road, so as to occasion risk of 
obstruction to persons using the road;  
or 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you and a number of other persons ( mention the 
class of persons ) are about to meet and proceed in a procession along the public street, etc., ( as the case 
may be ) and that such procession is likely to lead to a riot or an affray;  
or 
WHEREAS , etc., etc., ( as the case may be ); 
I do hereby order you not to place or permit to be placed any of the earth or st ones dug from land on any 
part of the said road;  
or 
I do hereby prohibit the procession passing along the said street, and strictly warn and enjoin you not 
to take any part in such procession ( or as the case recited may require ). 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________264 FORM No. 25  
MAGISTRATE’S ORDER DECLARING PARTY ENTITLED TO RETAIN POSSESSION OF LAND, ETC., IN DISPUTE  
(See section 145)  
 
It appears to me, on the grounds duly recorded, that a dispute, likely to induce a  breach of the peace, 
existed between                                      ( describe the parties by name and residence or residence only if 
the dispute be between bodies of villagers ) concerning certain                                        ( state concise ly the 
subject of dispute ), situate within my local jurisdiction, all the said parties were called upon to give in a 
written statement of their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the said                     ( the 
subject of dispute ), and being satisfied by due inquiry had thereupon, without reference to the merits of 
the claim of either of the said parties to the legal right of possession, that the claim of actual possession by 
the said                                                 ( name or names or description ) is true; I do decide and declare that 
he is ( or they are) in possession of the said                                                   ( the subject of dispute ) and 
entitled to retain such possession until ousted by due course o f law, and do strictly forbid any disturbance 
of his ( or their) possession in the meantime.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 26  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT IN THE CASE OF A DISPUTE AS TO THE POSSESSION OF LAN D, ETC.  
(See section 146)  
 
To the officer in charge of the police station at  
 
(or, To the Collector of                                                    ).  
 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that a dispute likely to induce a breach of the peace, 
existed between                     ( describe the parties concerned by name and residence, or residence only if 
the dispute be between bodies of villagers ) concerning certain                                             ( state concisely 
the subject of dispute ) situate within the limits of my jurisdiction, and the said parties were thereupon 
duly called upon to state in writing their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the               
said                     ( the subject of dispute ), and  whereas, upon due inquiry into the said claims, I have 
decided that neither of the said parties was in possession of the said                          ( the subject of 
dispute ) (or I am unable to satisfy myself as to which of the said parties was in posses sion as aforesaid);  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach the said                                   ( the subject of dispute ) by 
taking and keeping possession thereof, and to hold the same under attachment until the decree or order of 
a competent  Court determining the rights of the parties, or the claim to possession, shall have been 
obtained, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____ ________265 FORM No. 27  
MAGISTRATE’S ORDER PROHIBITING THE DOING OF ANYTHING ON LAND OR WATER  
 (See section 147)  
A dispute having arisen concerning the right of use of                                              ( state concisely the 
subject of dispute ) situa te within my local jurisdiction, the possession of which land ( or water) is claimed 
exclusively by                                           ( describe the person or persons ), and it appears to me, on due 
inquiry into the same, that the said land ( or water)  has been open to the enjoyment of such use by the 
public ( or if by an individual or a class of persons, describe him or them ) and ( if the use can be enjoyed 
throughout the year ) that the said use has been enjoyed within three months of the institution of the said 
inquiry ( or if the use is enjoyable only at a particular season, say , “during the last of the seasons at which 
the same is capable of being enjoyed ”); 
I do order that the said                                ( the claimant or claimants of possession ) or any one in 
their interest, shall not take ( or retain) possession of the said land ( or water) to the exclusion of the 
enjoyment of the right of use aforesaid, until he ( or they) shall obtain the decree or order of a competent 
Court adjudging him ( or them) to be entitled to exclusive possession.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 28  
BOND AND BAIL -BOND ON A PRELIMINARY INQUIRY BEFORE A POLICE OFFICER  
 (See section 169)  
I, (name ), of                                     , being charged with the offence of                                       , and 
after inquiry required to appear before the Magistrate of                          
or 
and after inquiry called upon to enter into my own recognizance to appear wh en required, do hereby bind 
myself to appear at                                 , in the Court of               , on the                 day of             next ( or 
on such day as I may hereafter be required to attend) to answer further to the said charge,  and in case of 
my making default herein.  I bind myself to forfeit to Government, the sum of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 (Signature ) 
 
I hereby declare myself ( or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us) surety ( or 
sureties ) for the above said ( name ) that he shall attend at                             in the Court of                     , on 
the            day of                 next ( or on such day as he may hereafter be required to attend), further to 
answer to the charge pend ing against him, and, in case of his making default therein, I hereby bind myself 
(or we hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19       . 
 (Signature ) 
_____________266 FORM No. 29  
BOND TO PROSECUTE OR GIVE EVI DENCE  
 (See section 170)  
I,                                 ( name ) of                                             ( place ), do hereby bind myself to attend 
at                                 in the Court of                              at                                   o’clock on the            day 
of                          next and then and there to prosecute ( or to prosecute and give evidence) ( or to give 
evidence) in the matter of a charge of                            against one A.B., and , in case of making default 
herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19   . 
 (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 30  
SPECIAL SUMMONS TO A PERSON ACCUSED OF A PETTY OFFENCE  
 (See section 206)  
To, 
(Name of the accused ) 
of                                                      (address )  
WHEREAS  your attendance is necessary to answer a charge of a petty offence ( state shortly the offence 
charged ), you are hereby required to appear in person ( or by pleader) before                          (Magistrate) 
of                            on the                     day of                    19              , or if you desire to plea d guilty to 
the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the aforesaid date the pl ea of guilty 
in writing and the sum of                   rupees as fine, or if you desire to appear by pleader and to plead 
guilty through such pleader, to authorise such pleader in writing to make such a plea of guilty on your 
behalf and to pay the fine t hrough such pleader.  Herein fail not.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
(Note .-The amount of fine specified in this summons shall not exceed on hundred rupees.)  
_____________  
 
FORM No. 31  
NOTICE OF COMMITMENT BY MAGISTRATE TO PUBLIC PROSECUTOR  
 (See section 209)  
The Magistrate of                        hereby gives notice that he has committed one                         for 
trial at the next Sessions; and the Magistrate hereby instructs the Public Prosecutor to conduct the 
prosecution of the said case.  
 
The charge against the accused is that,                                                 etc. ( state the offence as in the 
charge ) 
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________267 FORM No. 32  
CHARGES  
 (See sections 211,212 and 213)  
 
I. CHARGES WITH ONE -HEAD  
 
(1) (a) I,                                                                                     ( name and office of Magistrate, etc. ), 
hereby charge you                                    ( name of a ccused person ) as follows: — 
(b) On section 121 —That you, on or about the                                 day of            , at              , waged 
war against the Government of India and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 121 of 
the In dian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by this Court on the said charge.  
 
(Signature and seal of the Magistrate ) 
 
[To be substituted for  (b)]:— 
 
(2) On section 124 —That you, on or about the                 day of                           , at             , with the 
intention of inducing the President of India [ or, as the case may be , the Governor of          ( name of State )] 
to refrain from exercising a lawful power as such President ( or, as the case may be , the Government) 
assaulted President ( or, as the case may be , the Governor), and thereby committed an offence punishable 
under section 124 of the India Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(3) On section 161 —That you, being a pu blic servant in the                   Department, directly accepted 
from                            ( state the name ) for another party                 ( state the name ) gratification other than 
legal remuneration, as a motive for forbearing to do an officia l act, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 16 1 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(4) On section 166 —That you, on or about the               day of                   , at          , did ( or omitted 
to do, as the case may be )                 , such conduct being contrary to the provisions of              Act      , 
section          ,        and known by you to be prejudicial to                       , and thereby committed an 
offence punishable under sect ion 166 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(5) On section 193 —That you, on or about the                day of                , at          , in the course of 
the trial of                     before                        , s tated in evidence that “                          “ which statement 
you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of  this Court.  
(6) On section 304 —That you, on or about the              day of                    , at                   , committed 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, causing the death of                                         , and thereby 
commit ted an offence punishable under section 304 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance 
of this Court.  
(7) On section 306 —That you, on or about the         day of         , at                   , abetted the 
commission of suicide by A.B., a person in a state of intoxication, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 306 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(8) On section 325 —That you, on or about the                  day of            , at                  , voluntarily 
caused grievous hurt to                        , and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 325 of 
the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(9) On section 392 —That you, on or about the                   day of                           , at               , 
robbed               ( state the name ), and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 392 of the 
Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  268 (10) On section 395 —That you, on  or about the                      day of                   , at                , 
committed dacoity, an offence punishable under section 395 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of this Court.  
II. C HARGES WITH TWO OR MORE HEADS  
(1) (a) I,                                                                           (name and office of Magistrate, etc. ), hereby 
charge you                                                     ( name of accused person ) as follows: — 
(b) On section 241 —First —That you, on  or about the                day of                     , at          , 
knowing a coin to be counterfeit, delivered the same to another person, by name, A.B., as genuine, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 241 of the Indian Penal Cod e, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session.  
Secondly —That you, on or about the                               day of                     , at             , knowing a 
coin to be counterfeit attempted to induce another person, by name, A.B., to rece ive it as genuine, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 241 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session.  
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by the said Court on the said charge.  
 
(Signature and se al of the Magistrate ) 
 
[To be substituted for  (b)]:— 
(2) On sections 302 and 304 —First —That you, on or about the                 day of             , at           , 
committed murder by causing the death of                                      , and thereby  committed an offence 
punishable under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of 
Session.  
Secondly —That you, on or about the                               day of                   , at                , by causing 
the d eath of                        , committed culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and thereby 
committed an offence punishable under section 304 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the  cognizance 
of the Court of Session.  
(3) On sections 379 and 382 —First—That you, on or about the                  day of         , at           , 
committed theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian Penal 
Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.  
Secondly —That you, on  or about the                         day of              , at                  , committed theft, 
having made preparation for causing death to a  person in order to the committing of such theft, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 38 2 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session.  
Thirdly —That you, on or about the                        day of           , at           , committed theft, having 
made preparation for causing restraint to a person in order to  the effecting of your escape after the 
committing of such theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382 of the Indian 
Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.  
Fourthly —That you, on or about the                        day of                     , at                 , committed 
theft, having made preparation for causing fear of hurt to a person in order to the restraining of property 
taken by such theft and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382  of the Indian Penal 
Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.  
(4) Alternative charge on section 193 —That you, on or about the                day of          , at           , 
in the course of the inquiry into               , before                      , stated in evidence that “               “, and 
that you, on or about the                       day of                         , at                        , in the course of  the trial 
of                             , before                               , stated in the evidence that “                             “, one of 
which statements you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby 
committed an offence punishable under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code , and within the cognizance 
of the Court of Session.  
 
(In cases tried by Magistrates substitute  “within my cognizance ” for “within the cognizance of the Court 
of Session ”.) 269 III. C HARGES FOR THEFT AFTER PREVIOUS CONVICTION  
 
I,                                                                                           (name and office of Magistrate, etc. ) 
hereby charge you                                                 ( name of accused person ) as follows: — 
 
That you, on or about the                              day of                      , at                   ,             committed 
theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian Penal Code, and 
within the cognizance of the Court of Session ( or Magistrate, as the case may be).  And you, the said 
(name of accused ), stand further charged that you, before the committing of the said offence, that is to 
say, on the day of                                , had been convicted by the                      ( state Court by which 
convic tion was had)  at                                          of an offence punishable under Chapter XVII of the 
Indian Penal Code with imprisonment for a term of three years, that is to say, the offence of                    
house -breaking by night                                           (describe the offence in the words used in the section 
under which the accused was convicted ), which conviction is still in full force and effect, and that you are 
thereby liable to enhanced punishment under section 75 of th e Indian Penal Code.  
And I hereby direct that you be tried, etc.  
_____________  
 
FORM No. 33  
SUMMONS TO WITNESS  
 (See sections 61 and 244)  
To                                                                      of                            
WHEREAS  complain t has been made before me that                                                      ( name of the 
accused ) of                                                 ( address ) has ( or is suspected to have) committed the offence 
of                                                  (state the offence concisely with time and place ), and it appears to me 
that you are likely to give material evidence or to produce any document or other thing for the 
prosecution;  
You are hereby summoned to appear before this Court on the             day of                   next at                   
ten o’clock in the forenoon, to produce such document or thing or to testify what you know concerning 
the matter of the said complaint, and not to depart thence without leave of the Court; and yo u are hereby 
warned that, if you shall without just excuse neglect or refuse to appear on the said date, a warrant will be 
issued to compel your attendance.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19   . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 34  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON A SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT OR FINE IF PASSED BY A 1[COURT]  
2[(See sections 235, 248 and 255)]  
To the Officer in charge of Jail at  
WHEREAS  on the                        day of                  ,                                         ( name o f the prisoner ), 
the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be ) prisoner in case No.                         of the Calendar for 19             , 
was convicted before me                                                            ( name and official designation ) of the 
offence of                                                                                 ( mention the offence or offences concisely ) 
under section ( or sections)                    of the Indian Penal Code ( or of                            Act          ), and 
was sentenced to                                                  ( state the punishment fully and distinctly ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                         ( prisoner’s name ) 
into your custody i n the said Jail, together with this warrant, and thereby carry the aforesaid sentence into 
execution according to law.  
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35, for “ MAGISTRATE”.  
2. Subs. by  s. 35, ibid, for “( See sections 248 and 355)” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  270 FORM No. 35  
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY COMPENS ATION  
(See section 250)  
 
To the Officer in charge of Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                       (name and description ) has brought against                                 ( name and 
description of the accused person ) the complaint that                                                           (mention it 
concisely ) and the same has been dismissed on the ground that there was no reasonable ground for 
making the accusation against the said                                                        ( name ) and the order  of 
dismissal awards payment by the said                                                    ( name of complainant ) of the sum 
of rupees                      as compensation; and whereas the said sum has not been paid and an order has 
been made for his simpl e imprisonment in Jail for the period of                   days, unless the aforesaid sum 
be sooner paid;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                                           ( name ) 
into your custody, together  with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period of 
(term of imprisonment ), subject to the provisions of section 69 of the Indian Penal Code, unless the said 
sum be sooner paid, and on the receipt thereof, forthwith to set hi m at liberty, returning this warrant with 
an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 36  
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR ANSWERING TO CHARGE OF 
OFFENCE  
(See section 267)  
 
To the Officer in charge of Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  the attendance of                                                   ( name of prisoner ) at present 
confined/detained in the above -mentioned prison, is required in this Cour t to answer to a charge              
of                                                          ( state shortly the offence charged ) or for the purpose of a 
proceeding                                ( state shortly the particulars of the proceeding ); 
 
You a re hereby required to produce the said                       under safe and sure conduct before this 
Court at              on the               day of             , 19      , by           A.M. there to answer to the said charg e, 
or for the purpose of the s aid proceeding, and after this Court has dispensed with his further attendance, 
cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison.  
 
And you are further required to inform the said                              of the contents of t his order and 
deliver to him the attached copy thereof.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
 Countersigned.  
 
(Seal) (Signature ) 
____________271 FORM No. 37  
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR GIVING EVIDENCE  
(See section 267)  
 
 To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before this Court that                                            ( name of the 
accused ) of has committed the offence of                                                  (state offence concisely with time 
and place ) and it appears that                                           ( name of prisoner ) at present confined/detained 
in the above -mentioned prison, is likely to give material evidence for the prosecution/defenc e; 
 
You are hereby required to produce the said                                   under safe and sure conduct before 
this Court at                        on the                      day of                           , 19       , by        A.M.  there to give  
evidence in the matter now pending before this Court, and after this Court has dispensed with his further 
attendance, cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison;  
 
And you are further required to inform the said                                           of the contents of this order 
and deliver to him the attached copy thereof.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
 Countersigned.  
 
(Seal) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 38  
WARRANT OF COMMITMEN T IN CERTAIN CASES OF CO NTEMPT WHEN A FINE IS IMPOSED  
(See section 345)  
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  at a Court held before me on this day                                                 ( name and description 
of the offender ) in the pr esence (or view) of the Court committed wilful contempt;  
 
And whereas for such contempt the said                                                          ( name of the offender ) 
has been adjudged by the Court to pay a fine of rupees                            , or in default to suffer simple 
imprisonment for the period of                              (state the number of months or days);  
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                                          ( name of 
the offender ) into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the 
said period of                                ( term of imprisonment ), unless the said fine be sooner paid; and, on the 
receipt thereof, forthwit h to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the 
manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________272 FORM No. 39  
MAGISTRATE’S OR JUDGE’S WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF WITNESS REF USING TO ANSWER OR TO 
PRODUCE DOCUMENT  
(See section 349)  
To 
(name and designation of officer of Court ) 
 
WHEREAS                                                                                                    (name and description ), 
being summoned ( or brought before this Court) as a witness and this day required to give evidence on an 
inquiry into an alleged offence, refused to answer a certain question ( or certain questions) put to him 
touching the said alleged offence, and duly recorded, or having been c alled upon to produce any 
document has refused to produce such document, without alleging any just excuse for such refusal, and 
for his refusal has been ordered to be detained in custody for                                  ( term of detention 
adjudged ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to take the said                               ( name ) into custody, and him 
safely to keep in your custody for the period of                  days, unless in the meantime he shall consent to 
be examined and to answer the  questions asked of him, or to produce the document called for from him, 
and on the last of the said days, or forthwith on such consent being known, to bring him before this Court 
to be dealt with according to law, returning this warrant with an endorsemen t certifying the manner of its 
execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 40  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT UNDER SENTENCE OF DEATH  
(See section 366)  
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  at the Ses sion held before me on the                   day of           , 19          ,                 ( name of 
prisoner ), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be ), prisoner in case No.                                          of the 
Calendar for 19                     at the said Session, was duly convicted of the offence of culpable homicide 
amounting to murder under section                               of the Indian Penal Code, and sentenced to death, 
subject to the confirmation of the said sentence by the                     Court of                        ;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                          ( prisoner’s name ) 
into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and him there safely to kee p until you shall 
receive the further warrant or order of this Court, carrying into effect the order of the said Court.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________273 FORM No. 41  
WARRANT AFTER A COMMUTATION OF A SENTENCE  
1[(See sections 386, 413 and 416)]  
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  at a Session held on the             day of               , 19          ,                                  ( name of 
the prisoner ), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be ) prisoner in case No.                              of the 
Calendar for 19            at the said Session, was convicted of the offence of                               , punishable 
under section                   of the Indian Penal Code, and sentenced to                              , and was 
thereupon committed to your custody; and whereas by the order of the                Court of                        (a 
duplicate of which is hereunto annexed) the punishment adjudged by the said sentence has been 
commute d to the punishment of imprisonment for life;  
 
This is to authorise and require you safely to keep the said                               ( prisoner’s name ) in 
your custody in the said Jail, as by law is required, until he shall be delivered over by you to the proper 
authority and custody for the purpose of his undergoing the punishment of imprisonment for life under 
the said order,  
or 
if the mitigated sentence is one of imprisonment, say, after the words  “custody in the said Jail ”, “and there 
to carry into execution the punishment of imprisonment under the said order according to law ”. 
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 42  
WARRANT OF EXECUTION OF A SENTENCE OF DEATH  
2[(See sections 413 and 414)]  
To the Offic er in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                                     (name of the prisoner ), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be ) 
Prisoner in case No.                           of the Calendar for 19                  at the Session held before me on 
the        day of         , 19          , has been by a warrant of the Court, dated the                   day of                  , 
committed to your custody under sentence of death;                            and whereas the order of the High 
Court at               confirming the said sentence has been received by this Court;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to carry the said sentence into execution by causing the                    
said               to be hanged by the neck until he be dead, at                                           (time and place of 
execution ), and to return this warrant to the Court with an endorsement certifying that the sentence has 
been executed.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 for “(See section 386)” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for “( See section 414)” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).   274 FORM No. 43  
WARRANT TO LEVY A FINE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE  
(See section 421)  
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant ). 
 
WHEREAS                                                                     (name and description of the offender ) was on 
the               day of                , 19        , convicted before me of the offence of                       ( mention the 
offence concisely ), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                                             ; and whereas the 
said                      ( name ), although required to pay the said fine, has not paid the same or any part thereof;  
 
This is to authorize and require you to attach any movable property belonging to the said         (name ), 
which may be found within the district of                     ; and, if within                             ( state the number 
of days or hours allowed ) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid ( or forthwith), to sell 
the movab le property attached, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said fine, returning 
this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its 
execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 44  
WARRANT FOR RECOVERY OF FINE  
(See section 421)  
 
To the Collector of the district of  
 
WHEREAS                                                            (name, address and description of the offender ) was 
on the            day of             , 19                , convicted before me of the offence of                          ( mention 
the offence concisely ), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                      ; and  
 
WHEREAS  the said                                          (name ), although require to pay the said fine, has not 
paid the same or any part of thereof;  
 
You are hereby authorised and requested to realise the amount of the said fine as arrears of land 
revenue from the movable or immovable property, or b oth, of the said                                          ( name ) 
and to certify without delay what you have done in pursuance of this order.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________275 1[FORM No. 44A  
BOND FOR APPEARANCE OF OFFENDER RELEASED PENDING REALIS ATION OF FINE  
[See section 424 ( 1) (b)] 
 
WHEREAS  I,                                                ( name ) inhabitant of                                   ( place ), have 
been sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                                    and in default of payment thereof to undergo 
imprisonment for                               ; and whereas the Court has been pleased to order my release on 
condition of my executing a bond for my appearance on the following date ( or dates), namely: — 
 
I hereby bind myself to appear before the Court of                        at                 o’clock on the 
following date ( or dates), namely: — 
and, in case of making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees . 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
 
WHERE A BOND WITH SURETIES IS TO BE EXECUTED, ADD — 
We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above -named that he will appear before the Court of 
on the following date ( or dates), namely: — 
And, in case of  his making default therein, we bind ourselves jointly and severally to forfeit to 
Government the sum of rupees . 
(Signature ).] 
_____________  
 
 
FORM No. 45  
BOND AND BAIL -BOND FOR ATTENDANCE BEFORE OFFICER IN CHARGE OF POLICE STATION OR COURT  
 
[See sections 436, 2[436A,] 437, 3[437A,] 438 ( 3) and 441]  
 
I,                                      ( name ), of                              ( place ), having been arrested or detained 
without warrant by the Officer in charge of                                   police sta tion ( or having been brought 
before the Court of                           ), charged with the offence of                                 , and required t o 
give security for my attendance before such Officer of Court on condition that I shall attend such O fficer 
or Court on every day on which any investigation or trial is held with regard to such charge, and in case 
of my making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees . 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19    . 
 (Signature ) 
 
I hereby dec lare myself ( or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us) surety ( or 
sureties) for the above said                                                   ( name ) that he shall attend the Officer in 
charge of                                         police station or the Court of                                             on every day 
on which any investigation into the charge is made or any trial on such charge is held, that he shall be, 
and appear, before such Officer or Court for the purpose of such investigation or to answer the charge 
against him (as the case may be), and, in case of his making default herein, I hereby bind myself ( or we, 
hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of                  rupees . 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
 
_____________
                                                 
1. Ins. by A ct 45 of 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 43 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins.  by Act 5 of 2009, s. 32 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   276 FORM No. 46  
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY  
(See section 442)  
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at     
(or other officer in whose custody the person is ) 
 
WHEREAS                                                  (name and description of prisoner ) was committed to your 
custody under warrant of this Court, dated the                day of                                  , and has since with 
his surety ( or sureties ) duly executed a bond  under section 441 of the Code of Criminal Procedure;  
 
This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said                         ( name ) from your 
custody, unless he is liable to be detained for some other matter.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
1[FORM No. 47  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT TO ENFORCE A BOND  
(See section 446)  
To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at  
 
WHEREAS                                                           (name, description and address of person ) has failed 
to appear on                      ( mention the occasion ) pursuant to his recognizance, and has by default 
forfeited to Government the sum of rupees                                    ( the penalty in the bon d); and whereas 
the said                                  ( name of person ) has, on due notice to him, failed to pay the said sum or 
show any sufficient cause why payment should not be enforced against him;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach an y movable property of the said                   ( name ) that 
you may find within the district of                                     , by seizure and detention, and, if the said 
amount be not paid within                            , days to sell the proper ty so attached or so much of it as may 
be sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and to make return of what you have done under this warrant 
immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature )] 
___________ __
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  277 FORM No. 48  
NOTICE TO SURETY ON BREACH OF A BOND  
(See section 446)  
 
To                                                     of            
 
WHEREAS  on the                               day of                                         , 19                 , you became 
surety for                            ( name ) of                                                      ( place ) that he should appear 
before this Court on the                          day of                            and bound yourself in default thereof to 
forfeit the sum of rupees                               to Government; and whereas the said                             ( name ) 
has failed to appear before this Court and by reason of such default you have forfeited the aforesaid sum 
of rupees . 
 
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty or show cause, within                     days from this 
date, why payment of the said sum should not be enforced against you.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 49  
NOTICE TO SURETY OF FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
 (See section 446)  
 
To                                          of  
WHEREAS  on the                day of            , 19        , you became surety by a bond for               ( name ) 
of                     (place ) that he would be of good behaviour for the period of                    and bound 
yourself in default thereof to forfeit the sum of rupees                                 to Government; and whereas 
the said                                                                                             (name ) has been convicted of the 
offence of                                ( mention the offence concisely ) committed since you became such surety, 
whereby your security bond has become fo rfeited;  
 
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty of rupees                                  or to show cause 
within                     days why it should not be paid.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
_____________278 FORM No. 50  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AGAINST A SURETY  
(See section 446)  
 
To                                                    of  
WHEREAS                                                               (name, description and address ) has bound himself 
as surety for the appearance of                                                         ( mention the condition of the bond ) and 
the said                                                    ( name ) has made default, and thereby forfeited to Government 
the sum of rupees                                                     (the penalty in the bond ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property of the said                           ( name ) 
which you may find within the district of                                             , by seizure and detention; and, if the 
said amount be not paid within                                 days, to sell the property so attached, or so much of it 
as may be sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and make return of what you have done under this 
warrant immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 51  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF THE SURETY OF AN ACCUSED PERSON ADMITTED TO BAIL  
 (See section 446)  
 
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                                                                          (name and description of surety ) has bound 
himself as a surety for the appearance of                                                (state the condition of the bond ) 
and the said                               ( name ) has therein made default whereby the penalty mentioned in the 
said bond has been forfeited to Government; and whereas the said                              ( name of surety ) has, 
on due notice to him, failed to pay the said sum or show any sufficient cause why payment should not be 
enforced against him, and the same cannot be recovered by attachment and sale of his movable property, 
and an order has been made fo r his imprisonment in the Civil Jail for                         ( Specify the period ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent                                   (or Keeper) to 
receive the said                                      ( name) into your custody with the warrant and to keep him safely 
in the said Jail for the said                               ( term of imprisonment ), and to return this warrant with an 
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________279 FORM No. 52  
NOTICE TO THE PRINCIPAL OF FORFEITURE OF BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE  
(See section 446)  
To             ( name, description and address ) 
 
WHEREAS  on the                       day of                                     , 19              , you entered into a bond not 
to commit, etc.,                                                      ( as in the bond ), and proof of the forfeiture of the same 
has been given before me and duly recorded;  
 
You are hereb y called upon to pay the said penalty of rupees                               or to show cause before 
me within                                 days why payment of the same should not be enforced against you.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19        . 
 
(Seal of the  Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 53  
WARRANT TO ATTACH THE PROPERTY OF THE PRINCIPAL ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE  
 (See section 446)  
 
To  
(name and designation of police officer ), at the police station of  
 
WHEREAS                                                                                                  (name and description ) did, on 
the                 day of                 , 19          , enter into a bond for the sum of rupees                   binding 
himself not to commit a bre ach of the peace, etc.,                                             ( as in the bond ), and proof 
of the forfeiture of the said bond has been given before me and duly recorded; and whereas notice has 
been given to the said                                      (name ) calling upon him to show cause why the said sum 
should not be paid, and he has failed to do so or to pay the said sum;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging to the              
said                          (name ) to the value of rupees                             , which you may find within the 
district of                      , and, if the said sum be not paid within                                   , to sell the pr operty 
so attached, or so much of  it as may be sufficient to realize the same; and to make return of what you have 
done under this warrant immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19          . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________280 FORM No. 54  
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT  ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE  
(See section 446)  
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at  
WHEREAS  proof has been given before me and duly recorded that                               ( name and 
description ) has committed a breach of the  bond entered into by him to keep the peace, whereby he has 
forfeited to Government the sum of rupees                        ; and whereas the said                          ( name ) 
has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, although duly called 
upon to do so, and payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable property, and an 
order has been made for the imprisonment of the said                                      ( name ) in the Civil Jail of 
the peri od of                        ( term of imprisonment ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent                                              (or Keeper) 
of the said Civil Jail to receive the said                        ( name ) into your custody, together with this 
warrant, and to keep his safely in the said Jail for the said period of                          ( term of 
imprisonment ), and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 55  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AND SALE ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
 (See section 446)  
To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at  
 
WHEREAS                                 (name, description and address )               did, on the                      day 
of                   , 19        , give security by bond in the sum of rupees                             for the good 
behaviour of                                                       (name, etc., of the principal ), and proof has been given 
before me and duly recorded of the commission by the said                                                ( name ) of the 
offence of whereby the said bond has been forfeited; and wh ereas notice has been given to the                 
said                              ( name ) calling upon him to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, and 
he has failed to do so to pay the said sum;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging to the                    
said               ( name ) to the value of rupees             which you may find within the district of              , and, 
if the said sum be not paid within                     , to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be 
sufficient to realise the same, and to make return of what you have done under this warrant immediately 
upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________281 FORM No. 56  
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
 (See section 446)  
 
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at  
  
WHEREAS                                (name, description and address ) did, on the day of          , 19      , give 
security by bond in the sum of rupees                              for the good behaviour of                  ( name, etc., 
of the principal ), and proof of the breach of the said bond has been given before me and duly recorded, 
whereby the said                               (name ) has forfeited to Government the sum of rupees                   , 
and whereas he has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid 
although duly called upon to do so, and payment thereof  cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable 
property, and an order has been made for the imprisonment of the said                             ( name ) in the 
Civil Jail for the period of                               ( term of imprisonment ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the Superintendent                                      (or Keeper), to receive 
the said                             ( name ) into your custody, together with this warrant, and to keep him safely in 
the said Jail for the said perio d of                            ( term of imprisonment ), returning this warrant with an 
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh  
Amendm ent of Form No. 45 in the Second Schedule.  — In the Principal Act, in the Second Schedule, 
in Form No. 45, in paragraph 2, after the words, “to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees” the 
following words shall be added namely: — 
“and I shall pay the fine i mposed by the court in case I fail to produce the accused on the date fixed by 
the court.”  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 17 of 2019 s. 3]  
 
–––––––––  
 
1 THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Application of Act.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Employment of, or work by, women prohibited duri ng certain periods.  
5. Right to payment of maternity benefit.  
5A. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in certain cases.  
5B. Payment of maternity benefit in certain cases.  
6. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and paymen t thereof.  
7. Payment of maternity benefit in case of death of  a woman.  
8. Payment of medical bonus.  
9. Leave for miscarriage, etc.  
9A. Leave with wages for tubectomy operation.  
10. Leave for illness arising out of pregnancy, del ivery, premature birth of child, miscarriage, medic al 
termination of pregnancy or tubectomy operation.  
11. Nursing breaks.  
12. Dismissal during absence of pregnancy.  
13. No deduction of wages in certain cases.  
14. Appointment of Inspectors.  
15. Powers and duties of Inspectors.  
16. Inspectors to be public servants.  
17. Power of Inspector to direct payments to be mad e.  
18. Forfeiture of maternity benefits.  
19. Abstract of Act and rules thereunder to be exhi bited.  
20. Registers, etc.  
21. Penalty for contravention of Act by employer.  
22. Penalty for obstructing Inspector.  
23. Cognizance of offences.  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
25. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
26. Power to exempt establishments.  
27. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with  this Act.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Amendment of Act 69 of 1951.  
30. Repeal. 2 THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 
ACT  NO. 53 OF 1961 
[12 th December , 1961.] 
An Act to regulate the employment of women in certa in establishments for certain periods before 
and after child-birth and to provide for maternity benefit and certain other benefits.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Maternity Benefit Act,  
1961. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date 2 as may be notified in this behalf in the Official Gazette, — 
3[( a) in relation to mines and to any other establishme nt wherein persons are employed for the 
exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other perfo rmances, by the Central Government; and] 
(b) in relation to other establishments in a State, b y the State Government. 
2. Application of Act.—4[(1) It applies, in the first instance, — 
(a) to every establishment being a factory, mine or p lantation including any such establishment 
belonging to Government and to every establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition 
of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances; 
(b) to every shop or establishment within the meaning  of any law for the time being in force in 
relation to shops and establishments in a State, in  which ten or more persons are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months :] 
Provided that the State Government may, with the ap proval of the Central Government, after giving 
not less than two months’ notice of its intention o f so doing, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
declare that all or any of the provisions of this A ct shall apply also to any other establishment or c lass of 
establishments, industrial, commercial, agricultura l or otherwise. 
(2) 5[Save as otherwise provided in 6[sections 5A and 5B], nothing contained in this Act ] shall apply 
to any factory or other establishment to which the provisions of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1 948 
(34 of 1948), apply for the time being. 
3. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government” means, in relation to an  establishment being a mine, 7[or an 
establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other 
performances,] the Central Government and in relati on to any other establishment, the State 
Government; 
(b) “child” includes a still-born child; 
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1-9-1971).   
2. 1st November, 1963, vide  notification No. S.O. 2920 (E), dated 5th October,  1963, see  Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3 ( ii ). 
3. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 2, for the opening p aragraph (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 1972, s. 2, for “Nothing cont ained in this Act” (w.e.f. 1-6-1972).  
6. Subs. by Act 53 of 1976, s. 2, for “section 5A” (w.e.f. 1-5-1976).  
7. Ins. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  3 1[( ba ) “commissioning mother” means a biological mother who uses her egg to create an embryo 
implanted in any other woman;] 
(c) “delivery” means the birth of a child; 
(d) “employer” means — 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under th e control of the Government, a person or 
authority appointed by the Government for the super vision and control of employees or where no 
person or authority is so appointed, the head of th e department; 
(ii ) in relation to an establishment under any local a uthority, the person appointed by such 
authority for the supervision and control of employ ees or where no person is so appointed, the 
chief executive officer of the local authority; 
(iii ) in any other case, the person who, or the authori ty which, has the ultimate control over 
the affairs of the establishment and where the said  affairs are entrusted to any other person 
whether called a manager, managing director, managi ng agent, or by any other name, such 
person; 
2[( e) “establishment” means — 
(i) a factory; 
(ii ) a mine; 
(iii ) a plantation; 
(iv ) an establishment wherein persons are employed for  the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic 
and other performances; 3*** 
4[( iva) a shop or establishment; or] 
(v) an establishment to which the provisions of this Act have been declared under sub-section 
(1) of section 2 to be applicable;] 
(f) “factory” means a factory as defined in clause( m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 
1948); 
(g) “Inspector” means an Inspector appointed under se ction 14; 
(h) “maternity benefit” means the payment referred to  in sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
5[( ha ) “medical termination of pregnancy” means the term ination of pregnancy permissible under 
the provisions of Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971);]  
(i) “mine” means a mine as defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(j) “miscarriage” means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any period prior to or 
during the twenty-sixth week of pregnancy but does not include any miscarriage, the causing of 
which is punishable under the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860);  
(k) “plantation” means a plantation as defined in cla use ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour 
Act, 1951 (69 of 1951); 
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under  this Act; 
(m) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territ ory, means the Administrator thereof; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
2. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 4, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
3. The word “or” omitted by Act 61 of 1988, s. 3 (w .e.f. 10-1-1988).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid . (w.e.f. 10-1-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  4 (n) “wages” means all remuneration paid or payable in  cash to a woman, if the terms of the 
contract of employment, express or implied, were fu lfilled and includes — 
(1) such cash allowances (including dearness allowanc e and house rent allowance) as a 
woman is for the time being entitled to; 
(2) incentive bonus; and 
(3) the money value of the concessional supply of foo d grains and other articles, 
but does not include — 
(i) any bonus other than incentive bonus; 
(ii ) over-time earnings and any deduction or payment m ade on account of fines; 
(iii ) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund 
or for the benefit of the woman under any law for t he time being in force; and 
(iv ) any gratuity payable on the termination of servic e; 
(o) “woman” means a woman employed, whether directly or through any agency, for wages in 
any establishment. 
4. Employment of, or work by, women prohibited duri ng certain periods.— (1) No employer 
shall knowingly employ a woman in any establishment  during the six weeks immediately following the 
day of her delivery 1[, miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy] . 
(2) No woman shall work in any establishment during t he six weeks immediately following the day of 
her delivery 1[, miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy] . 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 6,  no pregnant woman shall, on a request being 
made by her in this behalf, be required by her empl oyer to do during the period specified in sub-secti on 
(4) any work which is of an arduous nature or which i nvolves long hours of standing, or which in any way  
is likely to interfere with her pregnancy or the no rmal development of the foetus, or is likely to cau se her 
miscarriage or otherwise to adversely affect her he alth. 
(4) The period referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall be — 
(a) the period of one month immediately preceding the  period of six weeks, before the date of her 
expected delivery; 
(b) any period during the said period of six weeks fo r which the pregnant woman does not avail 
of leave of absence under section 6. 
5. Right to payment of maternity benefit.—2[( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every woma n 
shall be entitled to, and her employer shall be lia ble for, the payment of maternity benefit at the ra te of the 
average daily wage for the period of her actual abs ence, that is to say, the period immediately preced ing 
the day of her delivery, the actual day of her deli very and any period immediately following that day. ] 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub-section, the average da ily wage means the average of the 
woman’s wages payable to her for the days on which she has worked during the period of three calendar 
months immediately preceding the date from which sh e absents herself on account of maternity, 3[the 
minimum rate of wage fixed or revised under the Min imum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948) or ten rupees, 
whichever is the highest]. 
(2) No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit u nless she has actually worked in an 
establishment of the employer from whom she claims maternity benefit, for a period of not less 
than 4[eighty days] in the twelve months immediately prec eding the date of her expected delivery: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 3, for “or her misca rriage” (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for the opening p aragraph (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for “or one rupee a day, whichever is higher.” ( w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for “one hundred and sixty days” (w.e.f. 10-1-19 89).  5 Provided that the qualifying period of 1[eighty days] aforesaid shall not apply to a woman who has 
immigrated into the State of Assam and was pregnant  at the time of the immigration.  
Explanation.—For the purpose of calculating under t his sub-section the days on which a woman has 
actually worked in the establishment, 2[the days for which she has been laid off or was on  holidays 
declared under any law for the time being in force to be holidays with wages] during the period of twe lve 
months immediately preceding the date of her expect ed delivery shall be taken into account.  
3[(3) The maximum period for which any woman shall b e entitled to maternity benefit shall be 4 
4[twenty-six weeks of which not more than eight week s] shall precede the date of her expected delivery: ] 
5[Provided that the maximum period entitled to mater nity benefit by a woman having two or more 
than two surviving children shall be twelve weeks o f which not more than six weeks shall precede the 
date of her expected delivery:] 
6[Provided further that] where a woman dies during t his period, the maternity benefit shall be payable 
payable only for the days up to and including the d ay of her death: 
7[ 8[Provided also that] where a woman, having been del ivered of a child, dies during her delivery or 
during the period immediately following the date of  her delivery for which she is entitled for the 
maternity benefit, leaving behind in either case th e child, the employer shall be liable for the mater nity 
benefit for that entire period but if the child als o dies during the said period, then, for the days u p to and 
including the date of the death of the Child.] 
9[(4) A woman who legally adopts a child below the a ge of three months or a commissioning mother 
shall be entitled to maternity benefit for a period  of twelve weeks from the date the child is handed over 
to the adopting mother or the commissioning mother,  as the case may be. 
(5) In case where the nature of work assigned to a woman is of such nature that she may work from 
home, the employer may allow her to do so after ava iling of the maternity benefit for such period and on 
such conditions as the employer and the woman may m utually agree.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Assam 
Amendment of Section 5 of Central Act 53 of 1961 (a s amended by Assam Act 12 of 1964). —In 
the explanation appended to sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of the principal Act, as amended by the Assam 
Act 12 of 1964, the word “six” appearing after the words “multiplied by” shall be substituted by the w ord 
“seven”. 
[Vide  Assam Act, 2 of 1984, s. 2.]  
10 [5A. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in  certain cases.— Every woman entitled to 
the payment of maternity benefit under this Act sha ll, notwithstanding the application of the Employee s’ 
State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), to the fact ory or other establishment in which she is employed , 
continue to be so entitled until she becomes qualif ied to claim maternity benefit under section 50 of that 
Act.] 
11 [5B. Payment of maternity benefit in certain cases. —Every woman—  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for “one hundred and sixty days” (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
2. Subs. by, s. 4, ibid ., for the days for which she has been laid off” (w .e.f. 10-1-1989). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 3 for ‘‘twelve weeks of which not more than six weeks’’ (w.e.f. 1-4-2017 ). 
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid ., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 1-4-2017) 
7. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for the second pr oviso (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
8. Subs. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 3 for “Provided furth er that” (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
9. Ins. by, s. 3, ibid  (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
10. Ins. by Act 21 of 1972, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1972).  
11. Ins. by Act 53 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-5-1976).  
 6 (a) who is employed in a factory or other establishme nt to which the provisions of the 
Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), apply; 
(b) whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) for a month exceed the amount 
specified in sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 9) of section 2 of that Act; and 
(c) who fulfils the conditions specified in sub-secti on ( 2) of section 5, 
shall be entitled to the payment of maternity benef it under this Act.] 
6. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and paymen t thereof.— (1) Any woman employed in an 
establishment and entitled to maternity benefit und er the provisions of this Act may give notice in wr iting 
in such form as may be prescribed, to her employer,  stating that her maternity benefit and any other 
amount to which she may be entitled under this Act may be paid to her or to such person as she may 
nominate in the notice and that she will not work i n any establishment during the period for which she  
receives maternity benefit. 
(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such noti ce shall state the date from which she will be 
absent from work, not being a date earlier than six  weeks from the date of her expected delivery. 
(3) Any woman who has not given the notice when she w as pregnant may give such notice as soon as 
possible after the delivery. 
1[( 4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall perm it such woman to absent herself from the 
establishment during the period for which she recei ves the maternity benefit.] 
(5) The amount of maternity benefit for the period pr eceding the date of her expected delivery shall 
be paid in advance by the employer to the woman on production of such proof as may be prescribed that 
the woman is pregnant, and the amount due for the s ubsequent period shall be paid by the employer to t he 
woman within forty-eight hours of production of suc h proof as may be prescribed that the woman has 
been delivered of a child. 
(6) The failure to give notice under this section sha ll not disentitle a woman to maternity benefit or 
any other amount under this Act if she is otherwise  entitled to such benefit or amount and in any such  
case an Inspector may either of his own motion or o n an application made to him by the woman, order th e 
payment of such benefit or amount within such perio d as may be specified in the order. 
 7. Payment of maternity benefit in case of death of  a woman.— If a woman entitled to maternity 
benefit or any other amount under this Act, dies be fore receiving such maternity benefit or amount, or  
where the employer is liable for maternity benefit under the second proviso to sub-section ( 3) of section 
5, the employer shall pay such benefit or amount to  the person nominated by the woman in the notice 
given under section 6 and in case there is no such nominee, to her legal representative. 
2[8. Payment of medical bonus.— (1) Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under t his Act shall 
also be entitled to receive from her employer a med ical bonus of one thousand rupees, if no pre-natal 
confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer free of charge. 
(2) The Central Government may before every three yea rs, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
increase the amount of medical bonus subject to the  maximum of twenty thousand rupees.] 
3[9. Leave for miscarriage, etc.— In case of miscarriage or medical termination of pr egnancy, a 
woman shall, on production of such proof as may be prescribed, be entitled to leave with wages at the rate 
of maternity benefit, for a period of six weeks imm ediately following the day of her miscarriage or, a s the 
case may be, her medical termination of pregnancy.]  
4[9A. Leave with wages for tubectomy operation.— In case of tubectomy operation, a woman shall, 
on production of such proof as may be prescribed, b e entitled to leave with wages at the rate of mater nity 
benefit for a period of two weeks immediately follo wing the day of her tubectomy operation.] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 5, for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2008, s. 2, for section 8 (w. e.f. 15-4-2008).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 4, for section 9 (w. e.f. 1-2-1996).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid . (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  7 10. Leave for illness arising out of pregnancy, del ivery, premature birth of child 1[, miscarriage, 
medical termination of pregnancy or tubectomy opera tion].— A woman suffering from illness arising 
out of pregnancy, delivery, premature birth of chil d 1[, miscarriage, medical termination of pregnancy or  
tubectomy operation] shall, on production of such p roof as may be prescribed, be entitled, in addition  to 
the period of absence allowed to her under section 6, or, as the case may be, under section 9, to leav e with 
wages at the rate of maternity benefit for a maximu m period of one month. 
11. Nursing breaks.— Every woman delivered of a child who returns to dut y after such delivery 
shall, in addition to the interval for rest allowed  to her, be allowed in the course of her daily work  two 
breaks of the prescribed duration for nursing the c hild until the child attains the age of fifteen mon ths. 
2[11A. Crèche facility.—( 1) Every establishment having fifty or more employee s shall have the 
facility of créche within such distance as may be p rescribed, either separately or along with common 
facilities: 
Provided that the employer shall allow four visits a day to the creche by the woman, which shall also 
include the interval for rest allowed to her. 
(2) Every establishment shall intimate in writing a nd electronically to every woman at the time of her  
initial appointment regarding every benefit availab le under the Act.] 
12. Dismissal during absence of pregnancy.— (1) When a woman absents herself from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shal l be unlawful for her employer to discharge or dism iss 
her during or on account of such absence or to give  notice of discharge or dismissal on such a day tha t the 
notice will expire during such absence, or to vary to her disadvantage any of the conditions of her se rvice. 
(2) (a) The discharge or dismissal of a woman at any time  during her pregnancy, if the woman but for 
such discharge or dismissal would have been entitle d to maternity benefit or medical bonus referred to  in 
section 8, shall not have the effect of depriving h er of the maternity benefit or medical bonus: 
Provided that where the dismissal is for any prescr ibed gross misconduct, the employer may, by order 
in writing communicated to the woman, deprive her o f the maternity benefit or medical bonus or both. 
3[( b) Any woman deprived of maternity benefit or medica l bonus, or both, or discharged or dismissed 
during or on account of her absence from work in ac cordance with the provisions of this Act, may, with in 
sixty days from the date on which order of such dep rivation or discharge or dismissal is communicated to 
her, appeal to such authority as may be prescribed,  and the decision of that authority on such appeal,  
whether the woman should or should not be deprived of maternity benefit or medical bonus, or both, or 
discharged or dismissed shall be final.] 
(c) Nothing contained in this sub-section shall affec t the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1). 
13. No deduction of wages in certain cases.— No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages 
of a woman entitled to maternity benefit under the provisions of this Act shall be made by reason only  
of — 
(a) the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of t he provisions contained in sub-section ( 3) of 
section 4; or 
(b) breaks for nursing the child allowed to her under  the provisions of section 11. 
 14. Appointment of Inspectors.— The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint such officers as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define 
the local limits of the jurisdiction within which t hey shall exercise their functions under this Act. 
15. Powers and duties of Inspectors.— An Inspector may, subject to such restrictions or c onditions 
as may be prescribed, exercise all or any of the fo llowing powers, namely: — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 6, for “or miscarria ge” (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-7-2017). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 7, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  8 (a) enter at all reasonable times with such assistant s, if any, being persons in the service of the 
Government or any local or other public authority, as he thinks fit, any premises or place where 
woman are employed or work is given to them in an e stablishment, for the purposes of examining any 
registers, records and notices required to be kept or exhibited by or under this Act and required thei r 
production for inspection; 
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any premises or place and who, he has reasonable 
cause to believe, is employed in the establishment:  
Provided that no person shall be compelled under th is section to answer any question or give any 
evidence tending to incriminate himself; 
(c) require the employer to give information regardin g the names and addresses of women 
employed, payments made to them, and applications o r notices received from them under this Act; 
and 
(d) take copies of any registered and records or noti ces or any portions thereof. 
16. Inspectors to be public servants.— Every Inspector appointed under this Act shall be d eemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 2 1 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
17. Power of Inspector to direct payments to be mad e.—1[( 1) Any woman claiming that — 
(a) maternity benefit or any other amount to which sh e is entitled under this Act and any person 
claiming that payment due under section 7 has been improperly withheld; 
(b) her employer has discharged or dismissed her duri ng or on account of her absence from work 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, 
may make a complaint to the Inspector. 
(2) The Inspector may, of his own motion or on receip t of a complaint referred to in sub-section ( 1), 
make an inquiry or cause an inquiry to be made and if satisfied that — 
(a) payment has been wrongfully withheld, may direct the payment to be made in accordance 
with his orders; 
(b) she has been discharged or dismissed during or on  account of her absence from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, may pas s such orders as are just and proper according to 
the circumstances of the case.] 
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspe ctor under sub-section ( 2) may, within thirty 
days from the date on which such decision is commun icated to such persons, appeal to the prescribed 
authority. 
(4) The decision of the prescribed authority where an  appeal has been preferred to it under sub-
section ( 3) or of the Inspector where no such appeal has been  preferred, shall be final. 
2[( 5) Any amount payable under this section shall be re coverable by the Collector on a certificate 
issued for that amount by the Inspector as an arrea r of land revenue.] 
 18. Forfeiture of maternity benefit.— If a woman works in any establishment after she has  been 
permitted by her employer to absent herself under t he provisions of section 6 for any period during su ch 
authorised absence, she shall forfeit her claim to the maternity benefit for such period. 
 19. Abstract of Act and rules thereunder to be exhi bited.— An abstract of the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder in the language o r languages of the locality shall be exhibited in a  
conspicuous place by the employer in every part of the establishment in which women are employed. 
 20. Registers, etc.— Every employer shall prepare and maintain such regi sters, records and muster-
rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 8, for sub-sections (1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid. , for sub-section ( 5) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  9 1[21. Penalty for contravention of Act by employer.— (1) If any employer fails to pay any amount 
of maternity benefit to a woman entitled under this  Act or discharges or dismisses such woman during o r 
on account of her absence from work in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act, he shall be punisha ble 
with imprisonment which shall not be less than thre e months but which may extend to one year and with 
fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupe es but which may extend to five thousand rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for sufficient reasons  to be recorded in writing, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a lesser term or fine only in lieu  of imprisonment. 
(2) If any employer contravenes the provisions of thi s Act or the rules made thereunder, he shall, if no  
other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under thi s Act for such contravention, be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or 
with both: 
Provided that where the contravention is of any pro vision regarding maternity benefit or regarding 
payment of any other amount and such maternity bene fit or amount has not already been recovered, the 
court shall, in addition, recover such maternity be nefit or amount as if it were a fine and pay the sa me to 
the person entitled thereto.] 
 22. Penalty for obstructing Inspector.— Whoever fails to produce on demand by the Inspector  any 
register or document in his custody kept in pursuan ce of this Act or the rules made thereunder or conc eals 
or prevents any person from appearing before or bei ng examined by an Inspector shall be punishable wit h 
imprisonment 2[which may extend to one year, or with fine which m ay extend to five thousand rupees], or 
with both. 
3[23. Cognizance of offences.— (1) Any aggrieved woman, an office-bearer of a trade union 
registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) of which such woman is a member or a 
voluntary organisation registered under the Societi es Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or an Inspec tor, 
may file a complaint regarding the commission of an  offence under this Act in any court of competent 
jurisdiction and no such complaint shall be filed a fter the expiry of one year from the date on which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magis trate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence under this Act]. 
 24. Protection of action taken in good faith.— No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shal l 
lie against any person for anything which is in goo d faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of  this 
Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. 
25. Power of Central Government to give directions. —The Central Government may give such 
directions as it may deem necessary to a State Gove rnment regarding the carrying into execution of the  
provisions of this Act and the State Government sha ll comply with such directions. 
26. Power to exempt establishments.— If the appropriate Government is satisfied that hav ing regard 
to an establishment or a class of establishments pr oviding for the grant of benefits which are not les s 
favourable than those provided in this Act, it is n ecessary so to do, it may, by notification in the O fficial 
Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and res trictions, if any, as may be specified in the notif ication, 
the establishment or class of establishments from t he operation of all or any of the provisions of thi s Act 
or of any rule made thereunder. 
27. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with  this Act.— (1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent t herewith contained in any other law or in the terms  of 
any award, agreement or contract of service, whethe r made before or after the coming into force of thi s 
Act: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 9, for section 21 (w .e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid ., for “which may extend to three months, or with f ine which may extend to five hundred rupees” 
(w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid ., for section 23 (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  10 Provided that where under any such award, agreement , contract of service or otherwise, a woman is 
entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which  are more favourable to her than those to which she  
would be entitled under this Act, the woman shall c ontinue to be entitled to the more favourable benef its 
in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that she  is entitled to receive benefits in respect of othe r matters 
under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a woman from entering into an 
agreement with her employer for granting her rights  or privileges in respect of any matter which are m ore 
favourable to her than those to which she would be entitled under this Act. 
 28. Power to make rules.— (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the co ndition of 
previous publication and by notification in the Off icial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purp oses 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener ality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the preparation and maintenance of registers, rec ords and muster-rolls; 
(b) the exercise of powers (including the inspection of establishments and the performance of 
duties by Inspectors for the purposes of this Act; 
(c) the method of payment of maternity benefit and ot her benefits under this Act in so far as 
provision has not been made therefor in this Act; 
(d) the form of notices under section 6; 
(e) the nature of proof required under the provisions  of this Act; 
(f) the duration of nursing breaks referred to in sec tion 11; 
(g) acts which may constitute gross misconduct for pu rposes of section 12; 
(h) the authority to which an appeal under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 12 shall lie; the 
form and manner in which such appeal may be made an d the procedure to be followed in disposal 
thereof; 
(i) the authority to which an appeal shall lie agains t the decision of the Inspector under section 17; 
the form and manner in which such appeal may be mad e and the procedure to be followed in disposal 
thereof; 
(j) the form and manner in which complaints may be ma de to Inspectors under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 17 and the procedure to be followed by them  when making inquiries or causing inquiries to be 
made under sub-section ( 2) of that section; 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, presc ribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under t his section shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament w hile it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session 1[or in two or more successive sessions, and if, bef ore the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid,] both Houses ag ree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Hous es agree that the rule should not be made, the rule  
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so how ever 
that any such modification or annulment shall be wi thout prejudice to the validity of anything previou sly 
done under that rule. 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 5, for certain words  (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  11  29. Amendment of Act 69 of 1951.— In section 32 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951. 
(a) in sub-section ( 1), the letter and brackets “( a)” before the words “in the case of sickness”, the 
word “and” after the words “sickness allowance” and  clause ( b) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section ( 2), the words “or maternity” shall be omitted. 
 30. Repeal.— On the application of this Act — 
(i) to mines, the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941 ( 19 of 1941); and 
(ii ) to factories situate in the Union territory of De lhi, the Bombay Maternity Benefit Act, 1929 
(Bom. Act VII of 1929), as in force in that territo ry, shall stand repealed. 
1  THE PROHIBITION OF BENAMI PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS ACT, 1988  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
Last updated: 29 -6-2021  
 
 
 
 
SECTIONS  CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and  commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
 
CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF BENAMI TRANSACTIONS  
3. Prohibition of benami  transactions.  
4. Prohibition of the right to recover property held  benami.  
5. Property held benami liable to  confiscation.  
6. Prohibition on re -transfer of property by  benamidar.  
 
 
 
 
7. Adjudicating  Authority.  
8. [Omitted ]. CHAPTER III 
AUTHORITIES  
9. [Omitted ]. 
10. [Omitted ]. 
11. [Omitted ]. 
12. [Omitted ]. 
13. [Omitted ]. 
14. [Omitted ]. 
15. [Omitted ]. 
16. [Omitted ]. 
17. [Omitted ]. 
18. Authorities and  jurisdiction.  
19. Powers of  authorities.  
20. Certain officers to assist in inquiry,  etc. 
21. Power to call for  information.  
22. Power of authority to impound  documents.  
23. Power of authority to conduct inquiry,  etc. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV  
ATTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND CONFISCATION  
24. Notice and attachment of property involved in benami  transaction.  
25. Manner of service of  notice.  
26. Adjudication of benami  property.  
27. Confiscation and vesting of benami  property.  
28. Management of properties  confiscated.  
29. Possession of the  property.  2 
  
 
 
SECTIONS  CHAPTER V 
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
30. Establishment of Appellate  Tribunal.  
31. Composition, etc., of Appellate  Tribunal.  
32. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate  Tribunal.  
33. Terms and conditions of services of Chairperson and Members of Appellate  Tribunal.  
34. Term of office of Chairperson and  Members.  
35. Removal of Chairperson and Member from office in certain  circumstances.  
36. Vacancies etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Appellate  Tribunal.  
37. Resignation and  removal.  
38. Member to act as Chairperson in certain  circumstances.  
39. Staff of Appellate  Tribunal.  
40. Procedure and powers of Appellate  Tribunal.  
41. Distribution of business amongst Benches of Appellate  Tribunal.  
42. Power of Chairperson of Appellate Tribunal to transfer  cases.  
43. Decision to be by  majority.  
44. Members, etc., to be public  servants.  
45. Bar of jurisdiction of civil  courts.  
46. Appeals to Appellate  Tribunal.  
47. Rectification of  mistakes.  
48. Right to  representation.  
49. Appeal to High  Court.  
 
 
 
 
50. Special  Courts.  CHAPTER VI 
SPECIAL COURTS  
51. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special  Court.  
52. Appeal and  revision.  
 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTION  
53. Penalty for benami  transaction.  
54. Penalty for false  information.  
54A. Penalty for failure to comply with notices or furnish information.  
54B. Proof of entries in records or documents . 
55. Previous  sanction.  
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
56. Repeal of provisions of certain  Acts.  
57. Certain transfers to be null and  void.  
58. Exemption.  
59. Power of Central Government to issue directions,  etc. 
60. Application of other laws not barred.  
61. Offences to be  non-cognizable.  
62. Offences by  companies.  3  SECTIONS  
63. Notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain  grounds.  
64. Protection of action taken in good  faith.  
65. Transfer of pending  cases.  
66. Proceedings, etc., against legal  representative.  
67. Act to have overriding  effect.  
68. Power to make rules.  
69. Laying of rules and notifications before  Parliament.  
70. Power to remove difficulties.  
71. Transitional provision.  
72. Repeal and  saving.  4  THE PROHIBITION OF BENAMI PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS  ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 45 OF 1988  
[5th September, 1988.]  
An Act to prohibit benami transactions and the right to recover property held benami and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1[CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY ] 
1. Short  title,  extent  and commencement .—2[(1) This Act may be called  the Prohibition  of Benami  
Property Transactions Act, 1988 .] 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 3***. 
(3) The provisions of sections 3, 5 and 8 shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions 
of this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of May,  1988.  
4[2. Definitions. — In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires, — 
(1) “Adjudicating Authority” means the Adjudicating Authority 5[referred to in ] section  7; 
(2) “Administrator” means an Income -tax Officer as defined in clause ( 25) of section 2 of the 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of  1961);  
(3) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal established under section  30; 
(4) “Approving Authority” means an Additional Commissioner or a Joint Commissioner as 
defined in clauses ( 1C) and ( 28C) respectively of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of  1961);  
(5) “attachment” means the prohibition of transfer, conversion, disposition or movement of 
property, by an order issued under this  Act; 
(6) “autho rity” means an authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section  18; 
(7) “banking company” means a company to which the provisions of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), applies and includes any bank or banking institution referred to in section 5 1 
of that Act;  
(8) “benami property” means any property which is the subject matter of a benami transaction 
and also includes the proceeds from such  property;  
(9) “benami transaction” means, — 
(A) a transaction or an  arrangement — 
(a) where a property is transferred to, or is held by, a person, and the consideration for 
such property has been provided, or paid by, another person;  and 
(b) the property is held for the immediate or future benefit, direct or indirect, of the 
person who has provided the  consideration,  
except when the  property is held by — 
(i) a Karta, or a member of a Hindu undivided family, as the case may be, and the property is 
held for his benefit or benefit of other members in the family and the consideration for such   
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f.  1-11-2016).  
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
    (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
4. Subs. by Act 43 of 2016, s. 4, for section 2 (w.e.f.  1-11-2016).  
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 154, for “appointed under” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2021).  5  property has been provided or paid out of the known sources of the Hindu undivided  family;  
(ii) a person standing in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of another person towards whom 
he stands in such capacity and includes a trustee, executor, partner, director of a company, a 
depository or a participant   as  an  agent  of  a  depository  under  the  Depositories  Act,  1996  
(22 of 1996) and any other person as may be notified by the Central Government for this  purpose;  
(iii) any person being an individual in the name of his spouse or in the name of any child of 
such individual and the consideration for such property has been provided or paid out of the 
known sources of the  individual;  
(iv) any person in the name of his brother or sister or lineal ascendant or descendant, where 
the names of brother or sister or line al ascendant or descendant and the individual appear as joint - 
owners in any document, and the consideration for such property has been provided or paid out of 
the known sources of the individual;  or 
(B) a transaction or an arrangement in respect of a property  carried out or made in a fictitious 
name;  or 
(C) a transaction or an arrangement in respect of a property where the owner of the property 
is not aware of, or, denies knowledge of, such  ownership;  
(D) a transaction or an arrangement in respect of a property where the person providing the 
consideration is not traceable or is  fictitious;  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that benami transaction shall not 
include any transaction involving the allowing of possession of any property to be tak en or retained in 
part  performance  of  a  contract  referred  to   in   section   53A   of   the   Transfer   of   Property 
Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), if, under any law for the time being in  force, — 
(i) consideration for such property has been provided by the pe rson to whom possession of 
property has been allowed but the person who has granted possession thereof continues to hold 
ownership of such  property;  
(ii) stamp duty on such transaction or arrangement has been paid;  and 
(iii) the contract has been  registered.  
(10) “benamid ar” means  a person  or a fictitious  person,  as the case may be, in whose  name  the 
benami property is transferred or held and includes a person who lends his name;  
(11) “Bench” means a Bench of the Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case 
may be; 
(12) “beneficial owner” means a person, whether his identity is known or not, for whose benefit 
the benami property is held by a  benamidar ; 
(13) “Board” means the Central Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the Central Boards of 
Revenue Act, 1963 (54 of  1963);  
(14) “director” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 34) of section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of  2013);  
(15) “executor” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( c) of section 2 of the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925);  
(16) “fair market value”, in relation to a property,  means — 
(i) the price that the property would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open market on the date of 
the transaction;  and 
(ii) where the price referred to in sub -clause ( i) is not ascertainable, such price as may be 
determined in accordance with such manner as may be  prescribed;  
(17) “firm” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) and shall include a limited liability partnership as defined i n the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of  2009);  6  (18) “High Court”  means — 
(i) the High Court within the jurisdiction of which the aggrieved party ordinarily resides or 
carries on business or personally works for gain;  and 
(ii) where the Government is the aggrieved party, the High Court within the jurisdiction of 
which the respondent, or in a case where there are more than one respondent, any of the 
respondents, ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for  gain;  
(19) “Initi ating Officer” means an Assistant Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner as defined 
in clauses ( 9A) and ( 19A) respectively of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of  1961);  
(20) “Member” means the Chairperson or the Member of the Adjudicating Authority or t he 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may  be; 
(21) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified” shall be construed  accordingly;  
(22) “partner” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 4 of the India n Partnership 
Act, 1932 (9 of 1932), and shall  include, — 
(a) any person who, being a minor, has been admitted to the benefits of partnership;  and 
(b) a partner of a limited liability partnership formed and registered under the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of  2009);  
(23) “partnership” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932), and shall include a limited liability partnership formed and 
registered under the Limited Liability Partnership Act,  2008 (6 of  2009);  
(24) “person” shall include — 
(i) an individual;  
(ii) a Hindu undivided  family;  
(iii) a company;  
(iv) a firm;  
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or  not; 
(vi) every artificial juridical person, not falling under sub -clauses ( i) to (v); 
(25) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this  Act; 
(26) “property” means assets of any kind, whether movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, 
corporeal or incorporeal and includes any right or interest or legal documents or instruments 
evidencing title to or interest in the property and where the property is capable of conversion into 
some other form, then the property in the converted form and also includes the proceeds from the 
property;  
(27) “public financial institution” shall have the sa me meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 72) of 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of  2013);  
(28) “Special Court” means a Court of Session designated as Special Court under sub -section ( 1) 
of section  50; 
(29) “transfer” includes sale, purchase or any other form  of transfer of right, title, possession or 
lien; 
(30) “trustee” means the trustee as defined in the section 3 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 
1882);  
(31) words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882 ( 2 of 1882), the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), the Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932 (9 of 1932), the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the Depositories  Act, 7  1996 (22 of 1996), the Prevention of Money -Laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 20 03), the Limited  
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009) and the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), shall have the 
same meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.]  
1[CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF BENAMI  TRANSACTIONS]  
3. Prohibition of benami transactions. —(1) No person shall enter into any benami  transaction.  
2* * * * * 
3[(2)] Whoever enters into any benami transaction shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.  
4[(3) Whoever enters into any benami transaction on and after the date of commencement of the 
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Act, 2016 (43 of 2016) shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 2), be punishable in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter VII.]  
5* * * * * 
4. Prohibition of the right to recover property held benami .—(1) No suit, claim or action to 
enforce any right in respect of any property held benami against the person in whose name the property is 
held or aga inst any other person shall lie by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of such 
property.  
(2) No defence based on any right in respect of any property held benami , whether against the person 
in whose name the property is held or against a ny other person, shall be allowed in any suit, claim or 
action by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of such property.  
6* * * * * 
7[5. Property held benami liable to confiscation. —Any property, which is subject matter of benami  
transaction, shall be liable to be confiscated by the Central Government.  
6. Prohibition on re -transfer of property by benamidar .—(1) No person, being a benamidar shall 
re-transfer the benami property held by him to the beneficial owner or any other person acting on his 
behalf.  
(2) Where any property is re -transferred in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
transaction of such property shall be deemed to be null and  void.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall not apply to a transfer  made in accordance with 
the provisions of section 190 of the Finance Act, 2016 (28 of  2016).]  
 
8[CHAPTER III 
AUTHORITIES  
9[7. Adjudicating Authority .—The competent authority authorised under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 
of the Smugglers and Foreign Exchan ge Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 (13 of 1976) shall 
be the Adjudicating Authority to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred by or under this 
Act.] 
 
8. [Composition of Authority ].—Omitted by Act 13 of 2021, s. 156 (w.e.f. 01-07-2021) . 
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 2016, s.  5 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
2. Omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).   
3. Sub -section ( 3) renumbered as sub -section ( 2) thereof by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
5. Omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-11-2016).  
6. Omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-11-2016).  
7. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sections 5 and 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
8. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-11-2016).  
9. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 155, for section 7 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2021).  8  9. [Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members ].—Omitted by Act 13 of 2021, s. 
156 (w.e.f. 01 -07-2021).  
10. [ Constitution of Benches of Adjudicating Authority ].—Omitted by  ibid, s. 156 (w.e.f. 01 -07-
2021).  
11. [Power of Adjudicating Authority to regulate its own procedure ].— Omitted by ibid, s. 156 
(w.e.f. 01 -07-2021) . 
12. [Term of office of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating Authority ].—Omitted by  ibid, 
s. 156 (w.e.f. 01 -07-2021) . 
13. [Terms and conditions of servic es of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating 
Authority ].—Omitted by  ibid, s. 156 (w.e.f. 01 -07-2021) . 
14. [Removal of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating Authority ].—Omitted by ibid, s. 156 
(w.e.f. 01 -07-2021).  
15. [Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances ].—Omitted by  ibid, s. 156 (w.e.f. 01 -
07-2021).  
16. [Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Adjudicating Authority ].—Omitted by  ibid, 
s. 156 (w.e.f. 01 -07-2021).  
17. [Officers and employees of Adjudicating Authority ].—Omitte d by ibid, s. 156 (w.e.f. 01 -07-
2021) . 
18. Authorities and jurisdiction .—(1) The following shall be the authorities for the purposes of this 
Act, namely: — 
(a) the Initiating  Officer;  
(b) the Approving  Authority;  
(c) the Administrator; and  
(d) the Adjudicating  Authority.  
(2) The authorities shall exercise all or any of the powers and perform all or any of the functions 
conferred on, or, assigned, as the case may be, to it under this Act or in accordance with such rules as may 
be prescribed.  
19. Powers of authorities .—(1) The authorities shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a 
suit in respect of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) discovery and  inspection;  
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any official of a banking company or a public 
financial institution or any other intermediary or reporting entity, and examining him on  oath;  
(c) compelling the production of books of account and other  documents;  
(d) issuing  commissions;  
(e) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  
(f) any other matter which may be  prescribed.  
(2)  All the persons summoned under sub -section ( 1) shall be bound to attend in person or through 
authorised agents, as any authority under this Act may direct, and shall be bound to state the truth upon 
any subject respecting which they are examined or make statements, and produce such documents as may 
be required.  
(3)  Every proceeding under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of  1860).  
(4)  For the purposes of this Act, any authority under this Act may requisition the service of any police 
officer o r of any officer of the Central Government or State Government or of both to assist him for all or 
any of the purposes specified in sub -section ( 1), and it shall be the duty of every such officer to comply 
with the requisition or  direction.  9  (5)  For the purposes of this section, “reporting entity” means any intermediary or any authority or of 
the Central or the State Government or any other person as may be notified in this  behalf.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -section ( 5), “intermediary” shall hav e the same meaning as 
assigned to it in clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) of  section 2  of  the  Prevention  of  Money -Laundering  
Act, 2002 (15 of  2003).  
20. Certain officers to assist in inquiry, etc .—The following officers shall assist the authorities in t he 
enforcement of this Act, namely: — 
(a) income -tax authorities appointed under sub -section ( 1) of  section 117 of the  Income -tax  Act, 
1961 (43 of  1961);  
(b) officers of the Customs and Central Excise  Departments;  
(c) officers appointed under sub -section  (1) of section 5 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985 (61 of  1985);  
(d) officers of the stock exchange recognised under section 4 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of  1956);  
(e) officers of the Reserve Bank of I ndia constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of  1934);  
(f) police;  
(g) officers of enforcement appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 36 of the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 (40 of  1999);  
(h) officers of the Securities and Exchange Board of India established under section 3 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of  1992);  
(i) officers  of any other  body  corporate  constituted  or established  under  a Central  or a State  Act; 
And 
(j) such other officers of the Central Government, State Government, local authorities or  banking  
companies as the Central Government may, by notification, specify, in this behalf.  
21. Power to call for information .—(1) The Initiating Officer or the Approving Authority or the 
Adjudicating Authority shall have power to require any officer of the Central Government or State 
Government or a local body or any person or officer who is responsible for registering and maintaining 
books of account or other do cuments containing a record of any transaction relating to any property or any 
other person to furnish any information in relation to any person, point or matter as in his opinion shall be 
useful for or relevant for the purposes of this  Act. 
(2) Without pr ejudice to sub -section ( 1), every officer or person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall 
furnish such information to any authority under this Act in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
22. Power of authority to impound documents .—(1) Where any books of account or other 
documents are produced before the authority in any proceedings under this Act and the authority in this 
behalf has reason to believe that any of the books of account or other documents are required to be 
impounded and retained for any inquiry under this Act, it may impound and retain the books of account or 
other documents for a period not exceeding three months from the date of order of attachment made by the 
Adjudicating Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section  26: 
Provided that the period for retention of the books of account or other documents may be extended 
beyond a period exceeding three months from the date of order of attachment made by the Adjudicating 
Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 26 where the a uthority records in writing the reasons for 
extending the same.  
(2) Where the authority impounding and retaining the books of account or other documents, under 
sub-section ( 1) is the Initiating Officer, he shall obtain approval of the Approving Authority withi n a 
period of fifteen days from the date of initial impounding and seek further approval of the Approving 
Authority for extending the period of initial retention, before the expiry of the period of initial retention, if 
so required.  10  (3) The period of retention  of the books of account or other documents under sub -section ( 1) shall in 
no case exceed a period of thirty days from the date of conclusion of all the proceedings under this  Act. 
(4) The person, from whom the books of account or other documents were impounde d under  
sub-section ( 1), shall be entitled to obtain copies  thereof.  
(5) On the expiry of the period specified under sub -section ( 1), the books of account or other 
documents shall be returned to the person from whom such books of account or other documents we re 
impounded unless the Approving Authority or the Adjudicating Authority permits their release to any 
other person.  
23. Power of authority to conduct inquiry, etc .—The Initiating Officer, after obtaining prior 
approval of the Approving Authority, shall have power to conduct or cause to be conducted any inquiry or 
investigation in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account or other 
documents, in respect of any other relevant matters under this  Act. 
1[Explanation .—For the r emoval of doubts, it is hereby clarified that nothing contained in this section 
shall apply and shall be deemed to have ever applied where a notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 24 has 
been issued by the Initiating Officer.]  
 
 
CHAPTER IV  
ATTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND CONFISCATION  
24. Notice and attachment of property involved in benami transaction .—(1) Where the Initiating 
Officer, on the basis of material in his possession, has reason to believe that any person is a benamidar in 
respect of a property,  he may, after recording reasons in writing, issue a notice to the person to show cause 
within such time as may be specified in the notice why the property should not be treated as benami 
property.  
(2)  Where a notice under sub -section ( 1) specifies any proper ty as being held by a benamidar referred 
to in that sub -section, a copy of the notice shall also be issued to the beneficial owner if his identity is 
known.  
(3) Where the Initiating Officer is of the opinion that the person in possession of the property held 
benami may alienate the property during the period specified in the notice, he may, with the previous 
approval of the Approving Authority, by order in writing, attach provisionally the property in the manner 
as may be prescribed, for a period not exceeding ninety days 2[from the last day of the month in which the 
notice under sub -section ( 1) is issued .] 
(4) The Initiating Officer, after making such inquires and calling for such reports or evidence as he 
deems fit and taking into account all relevant materials, shall, within a period of ninety days 2[from the 
last day of the month in which the notice under sub -section ( 1) is issued] ,— 
(a) where the provisional attachment has been made under sub -section  (3),— 
(i) pass an order continuing the provisional attachment of the property with the prior approval 
of the Approving Authority, till the passing of the order by the Ad judicating Authority under sub -
section ( 3) of section 26;  or 
(ii) revoke the provisional attachment of the property with the prior approval of the 
Approving  Authority;  
(b) where provisional attachment has not been made under sub -section  (3),— 
(i) pass an order provisionally attaching the property with the prior approval of the Approving 
Authority, till the passing of the order by the Adjudicating Authority under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 26;  or 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 173 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016). 
2. Subs. by  Act 23 of 2019, s. 174,  for “from the date of issue of notice under sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).  11  (ii) decide not to attach the property as specified in the notice, with the prior approval of the 
Approving  Authority.  
1[Explanation .— For the purposes of this section, in computing the period of limitation, the period 
during which the proceeding is stayed by an order or injunction of any court shall be excluded:  
Provided that  where immediately after the exclusion of the aforesaid period, the period of limitation 
referred to in sub -section ( 4) available to the Initiating Officer for passing order of attachment is less than 
thirty days, such remaining period shall be deemed to b e extended to thirty days:  
Provided further that where immediately after the exclusion of the aforesaid period, the period of 
limitation referred to in sub -section ( 5) available to the Initiating Officer to refer the order of attachment to 
Adjudicating Aut hority is less than seven days, such remaining period shall be deemed to be extended to 
seven days.]  
(5) Where the Initiating Officer passes an order continuing the provisional attachment of the property 
under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) or passes an order provisionally attaching the property 
under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b) of that sub -section, he shall, within fifteen days from the date of the 
attachment, draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the Adjudicating  Authority.  
25. Man ner of service of notice .—(1) A notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 24 may be served on 
the person named therein either by post or as if it were a summons issued by a Court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of  1908).  
(2) Any notice referred to in sub-section ( 1) may be  addressed — 
(i) in case of an individual, to such  individual;  
(ii) in the case of a firm, to the managing partner or the manager of the  firm;  
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, to Karta or any member of such  family;  
(iv) in the case of a company, to the principal officer  thereof;  
(v) in the case of any other association or body of individuals, to the principal officer or any 
member thereof;  
(vi) in the case of any other person (not being an individual), to the person who manages or 
controls his  affairs. 
26. Adjudication of benami property .—(1) On receipt of a reference under sub -section ( 5) of  
section 24, the Adjudicating Authority shall issue notice, to furnish such documents, particulars or 
evidence as is considered necessary on a date to be spec ified therein, on the following persons,  namely: — 
(a) the person specified as a benamidar  therein;  
(b) any person referred to as the beneficial owner therein or identified as  such;  
(c) any interested party, including a banking  company;  
(d) any person who h as made a claim in respect of the  property:  
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall issue notice within a period of thirty days from the 
date on which a reference has been received:  
Provided further that the notice shall provide a period of not less  than thirty days to the person to 
whom the notice is issued to furnish the information sought.  
(2) Where the property is held jointly by more than one person, the Adjudicating Authority shall 
make all endeavours to serve notice to all persons holding the  property: 
Provided that where the notice is served on anyone of the persons, the service of notice shall not be 
invalid on the ground that the said notice was not served to all the persons holding the property.  
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall,  after— 
(a) considering the reply, if any, to the notice issued under sub -section  (1); 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 174 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).  12  (b) making or causing to be made such inquiries and calling for such reports or evidence as it 
deems fit; and  
(c) taking into account all relevant  materials,  
provide an opportunity of being  heard to the person specified as a benamidar therein, the Initiating 
Officer, and any other person who claims to be the owner of the property, and, thereafter, pass an order — 
(i) holding the property not to be a benami property and revoking the attachment ord er; or 
(ii) holding the property to be a benami property and confirming the attachment order, in all 
other cases.  
(4) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that some part of the properties in respect of which 
reference has been made to him is benami propert y, but is not able to specifically identify such part, he 
shall record a finding to the best of his judgment as to which part of the properties is held  benami . 
(5) Where in the course of proceedings before it, the Adjudicating Authority has reason to believe that 
a property, other than a property referred to it by the Initiating Officer is benami property, it shall 
provisionally attach the property and the property s hall be deemed to be a property referred to it on the 
date of receipt of the reference under sub -section ( 5) of section  24. 
(6) The Adjudicating Authority may, at any stage of the proceedings, either on the application of any 
party, or suo motu , strike out the  name of any party improperly joined or add the name of any person 
whose presence before the Adjudicating Authority may be necessary to enable him to adjudicate upon and 
settle all the questions involved in the  reference.  
(7) No order under sub -section ( 3) sha ll be passed after the expiry of one year from the end of the 
month in which the reference under sub -section ( 5) of section 24 was  received.  
1[Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, in computing the period of limitation, the period 
during which  the proceeding is stayed by an order or injunction of any court shall be excluded:  
Provided that where immediately after the exclusion of the aforesaid period, the period of limitation 
available to the Adjudicating Authority for passing order is less than  sixty days, such remaining period shall 
be deemed to be extended to sixty days. ] 
2[Provided that where the time limit for passing order under this sub -section expires during the period 
beginning from the 1st day of July, 2021 and ending on the 29th day of  September, 2021, the time limit for 
passing such order shall be extended to the 30th day of September, 2021 .] 
(8) The benamidar or any other person who claims to be the owner of the property may either appear 
in person or take the assistance of an authorised representative of his choice to present his  case.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -section ( 8), authorised representative means a person 
authorised in writing, being — 
(i) a person related to the benamidar or such other person in any manner, or a person reg ularly 
employed by the benamidar or such other person as the case may be;  or 
(ii) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the benamidar or such other person maintains an 
account or has other regular dealings;  or 
(iii) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practice in any civil court in India;  or 
(iv) any person  who has passed  any accountancy  examination  recognised  in this behalf  by the Board;  
or 
(v) any person  who has acquired  such educational  qualifications  as the Board  may prescribe  for this 
purpose.  
27. Confiscation and vesting of benami property .—(1) Where an order is passed in respect of any 
property under sub -section ( 3) of section 26 holding such property to be a benami property, the 
Adjudicating Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the person concerned, make an 
order confiscating the property held to be a benami  property:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 175 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).  
2. Ins. by  Act 13 of 2021, s. 157 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2021).  13  Provided that where an appeal has been filed against the order of the Adju dicating Authority, the 
confiscation of property shall be made subject to the order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under  
section  46: 
Provided further that the confiscation of the property shall be made in accordance with such 
procedure as may be  prescri bed. 
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a property held or acquired by a person from the 
benamidar for adequate consideration, prior to the issue of notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 24 
without his having knowledge of the benami  transaction.  
(3) Where an order of confiscation has been made under sub -section ( 1), all the rights and title in such 
property shall vest absolutely in the Central Government free of all encumbrances and no compensation 
shall be payable in respect of such  confiscation.  
(4) Any right of any third person created in such property with a view to defeat the purposes of this 
Act shall be null and  void.  
(5) Where no order of confiscation is made upon the proceedings under this Act attaining finality, no 
claim shall lie against the  Governme nt. 
28. Management of properties confiscated .—(1) The Administrator shall have the power to receive 
and manage the property, in relation to which an order of confiscation under sub -section ( 1) of section 27 
has been made, in such manner and subject to such  conditions, as may be  prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, notify as many of its 
officers as it thinks fit, to perform the functions of  Administrators.  
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to 
dispose of the property which is vested in the Central Government under sub -section ( 3) of section 27, in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be  prescribed.  
29. Possession of the property .—(1) Where an order of confiscation in respect of a property under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 27, has been made, the Administrator shall proceed to take the possession of the 
property.  
(2) The Administrator  shall, — 
(a) by notice in writing, order within seven days of the date of the service of notice to any person, 
who may be in possession of the benami property, to surrender or deliver possession thereof to the 
Administrator or any other person duly authorised in writing by him in this  behalf;  
(b) in the event of non -compliance of the or der referred to in clause ( a), or if in his opinion, 
taking over of immediate possession is warranted, for the purpose of forcibly taking over possession, 
requisition the service of any police officer to assist him and it shall be the duty of the officer t o 
comply with the  requisition.  
CHAPTER V 
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
30. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal .—The Central Government shall, by notification, establish 
an Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals against the orders of 1[any authority ] under this  Act. 
 
31. Composition etc., of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a 
Chairperson and at least two other Members of which one shall be a Judicial Member and other shall be an 
Administrative  Member.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this  Act,— 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised by Benches  thereof;  
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson with two Members as the Chairperson may 
deem  fit; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 176, for “the Adjudicating Authority” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).  14  (c) the Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit in the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi and at such other places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson, 
by notification,  specify;  
(d) the Central Government shall, by notification, specify the areas in relation to which each 
Bench of the Appel late Tribunal may exercise its  jurisdiction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Chairperson may transfer a Member 
from one Bench to another  Bench.  
32. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) A 
person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal unless he is a sitting 
or retired Judge of a High Court, who has completed not less than five years’ of  service.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as  a Member unless  he— 
(a) in the case of a Judicial Member, has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held 
the post of Additional Secretary or equivalent post in that  Service;  
(b) in the case of an Administrative Member, has been a Member of the Indian Revenue Service 
and has held the post of Chief Commissioner of Income tax or equivalent post in that  Service.  
(3) No sitting Judge of a High Court shall be appointed under this section except after consultation 
with the Chief Justice of the High  Court.  
(4) The Cha irperson or a Member holding a post as such in any other Tribunal, established under any 
law for the time being in force, in addition to his being the Chairperson or a Member of that Tribunal, 
may be appointed as the Chairperson or a Member, as the case ma y be, of the Appellate Tribunal under 
this Act.  
33. Terms and conditions of services of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) 
The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
other Memb ers shall be such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to their disadvantage during 
their tenure.  
(2) Any vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member shall be filled up within 
a period of three months from the date on which such vacancy occurs.  
34. Term of office of Chairperson and Members .—The Chairperson and Members of the Appellate 
Tribunal shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which they enter upon their 
office, or until they attain the ag e of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for 
reappointment.  
35. Removal of Chairperson and Member from office in certain circumstances .—(1) The Central 
Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of High Court, remove from office of the 
Chairperson or any Member,  who— 
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent;  or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government involves 
moral turpitude;  or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable;  or 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions;  or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Mem ber shall not be removed from his office except by an order 
made by the Central Government after an inquiry made by Chief Justice of the High Court in which the 
Chairperson or Judicial Member has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasona ble 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those  charges.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend from office the Chairperson or Judicial Member in respect 
of whom a reference of conducting an inquiry has been made to the Chief Justice of the High Court under  
sub-section ( 2), until the Central Government passes an order on receipt of the report of inquiry made by 15  Chief Justice of the High Court on the  reference.  
(4) The Central Government may regulate the procedure for inquiry referred to in sub -section ( 2) in 
the manner as may be  prescribed.  
(5) The Administrative Member may be removed from his office by an order of the Central 
Government on the grounds specified in sub -section ( 1) and in accordance with the procedure notified by 
the Central Government:  
Provided that the Administrative Member shall not be removed unless he has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
36. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Appellate Tribunal .—No act or proceeding of 
the Appellate Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason  of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Tribunal;  or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Tribunal;  or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Tribunal not affecting the merits of the  case.  
37. Resignation and removal .—The Chairperson or any other Member may, by notice in writing 
under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his  office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or any other Member shall, unless he is perm itted by the Central 
Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from 
the date of receipt of the notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or 
until the expiry of  his term of office, whichever is earlier.  
38. Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances .—(1) In the event of the occurrence of 
any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal by reason of his death, resignation 
or otherw ise, the senior -most Member shall act as the Chairperson until the date on which a new 
Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his 
office.  
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his fu nctions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, the senior -most Member shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which 
the Chairperson resumes his  duties.  
39. Staff of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall prov ide the Appellate Tribunal 
with such officers and employees as it may thinks  fit. 
(2) The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the 
general superintendence of the  Chairperson.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and employees of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be such, as may be  prescribed.  
40. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers to regulate its own  procedure.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, have the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the att endance of any person and examining him on  oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of  documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on  affidavits;  
(d) subject to  the  provisions  of  sections  123  and  124  of  the  Indian  Evidence  Act,  1872  
(1 of 1872), requisitio ning any public record or document or copy of such record or document from 
any office;  16  (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or  documents;  
(f) reviewing its  decisions;  
(g) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting  aside  any order  of dismissal  of any representation  for default  or any order  passed  by it 
ex parte ; and  
(i) any other matter, which may be, prescribed by the Central  Government.  
(3)  An order made by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by it as a decree of 
civil court and, for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil  court.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having jur isdiction and the civil court shall execute the order as if it were 
a decree made by that  court.  
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (4 5 of 1860) and the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of  1974).  
41. Distribution of business amongst Benches of Appellate Tribunal .—Where any Benches ar e 
constituted, the Chairperson may, from time to time, by notification, make provision as to the distribution 
of the business of the Appellate Tribunal amongst the Benches and also provide for the matters which may 
be dealt with by each  Bench.  
42. Power of  Chairperson of Appellate Tribunal to transfer cases .—On the application of any of 
the parties and notice to the parties, and after hearing them, or on his own motion without any notice, the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal may transfer any case pendi ng before one Bench, for disposal, to 
any other  Bench.  
43. Decision to be by majority .—If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in 
opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to th e 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for 
hearing on the point or points by one or more of the other Members and the point or points shall be 
decided according to the opinion of the majo rity of the Members of the Appellate Tribunal who have heard 
the case, including those who first heard  it. 
44. Members, etc., to be public servants .—The Chairperson, Members and other officers and 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal, the Adjudicating Autho rity, Approving Authority, Initiating Officer, 
Administrator and the officers subordinate to all of them shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of  1860).  
45. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts. —No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which any of the authorities, an Adjudicating Authority or the 
Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be  granted by 
any court or other forum in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred 
by or under this  Act. 
46. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Any person, including the Initiating Officer, aggrieved by 
an order of the Adjudicating Authority may prefer an appeal in such form and along with such fees, as may 
be prescribed, to the Appellate Tribunal against the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under sub -
section ( 3) of section 26, within a period of forty -five day s from the date of the  order.  
1[(1A) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the authority under section 54A may prefer an 
appeal in such form along with such fees, as may be prescribed, to the Appellate Tribunal against the said 
order within a period o f forty -five days from the date of that order. ] 
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the said period of forty -five days, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented, by sufficient cause, from filing the appeal in  time.  
(3) On receipt o f an appeal under sub -section ( 1), 1[or sub -section ( 1A)] the Appellate Tribunal may, 
after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 177 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).  17  fit. 
(4) An Appellate Tribunal while deciding the appeal shall hav e the  power — 
(a) to determine a case finally, where the evidence on record is  sufficient;  
(b) to take additional evidence or to require any evidence to be taken by the Adjudicating 
Authority, where the Adjudicating Authority has refused to admit evidence, which ou ght to have been 
admitted;  
(c) to require any document to be produced or any witness to be examined for the purposes of 
proceeding before  it; 
(d) to frame issues which appear to the Appellate Tribunal essential for adjudication of the case 
and refer them to the Adjudicating Authority for  determination;  
(e) to pass final order and affirm, vary or reverse an order of adjudication passed by the 
Adjudicating Authority and pass such other order or orders as may be necessary to meet the ends of 
justice.  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal, as far as possible, may hear and finally decide the appeal within a period 
of one year from the last date of the month in which the appeal is  filed.  
47. Rectification of mistakes .—1[(1) The Appellate Tribunal or any authority may, in order to rec tify 
any mistake apparent on the face of the record, amend any order passed by it under the provisions of this 
Act, within a period of one year from the end of the month in which such order was passed. ] 
(2) No amendment shall be made under sub -section ( 1), if the amendment is likely to affect any person 
prejudicially, unless he has been given notice of intention to do so and has been given an opportunity of 
being  heard.  
48. Right to representation .—(1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal  under this 
Act may either appear in person or take the assistance of an authorised representative of his choice to 
present his case before the Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government may authorise one or more of its officers to act as presenting office rs on 
its behalf, and every person so authorised may present the case with respect to any appeal before the 
Appellate  Tribunal.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “authorised representative” means a person authorised 
by the appellant in writing  to appear on his behalf, being — 
(i) a person related to the appellant in any manner, or a person regularly employed by the 
appellant; or  
(ii) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the appellant maintains an account or has other 
regular dealings;  or 
(iii) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practice in any civil court in India;  or 
(iv) any person who has passed any accountancy examination recognised in this behalf by the 
Board;  or 
(v) any person who has acquired such educational qualifications as the Board may prescribe  for 
this purpose.  
49. Appeal to High Court .—(1) Any party aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within a period of sixty days from the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Appell ate Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out 
of such order.  
(2) The High Court may entertain any appeal after the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the per iod specified in  
sub-section  (1). 
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 23 of 2019, s.178, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019) . 18  (3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall 
formulate that  question.  
(4) The appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the respondents shall, at t he 
hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such  question.  
(5) Nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the court to hear, 
for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, if it is 
satisfied that the case involves such  question.  
(6) The High Court shall decide the question of law so formulated and deliver the judgment thereon 
containing the grounds on which any decision is founded and may award any cost as it deems  fit. 
(7) The High Court may determine any issue  which — 
(a) has not been determined by the Appellate Tribunal;  or 
(b) has been wrongly determined by the Appellate Tribunal, by reason of a decision on such 
question of law as is referred to in sub-section  (1). 
(8) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908        
(5 of 1908), relating to appeals to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals 
under this  section.  
 
CHAPTER VI 
SPECIAL COURTS  
50. Special Courts .—(1) The Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High 
Court, shall, for trial of an offence punishable under this Act, by notification, designate one or more Courts 
of Session as Special Court or Spe cial Courts for such area or areas or for such case or class or group of 
cases as may be specified in the  notification.  
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an offence other than an 
offence referred to in sub -section ( 1), with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the same  trial. 
(3) The Special Court shall not take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except upon 
a complaint in writing made  by— 
(i) the authority;  or 
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or State Government authorised in writing by that 
Government by a general or special order made in this  behalf.  
(4) Every trial under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously as possible and every end eavour 
shall be made by the Special Court to conclude the trial within six months from the date of filing of the 
complaint.  
51. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special Court .—(1) 
Save as otherwise  provided  in  this  Act,  the  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1973   
(2 of 1974), shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and the persons conducting the 
prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be Public  Prosecutors:  
Provide d that the Central Government may also appoint for any case or class or group of cases, a 
Special Public Prosecutor.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public 
Prosecutor under this section unless, the Public  Prosecutor has been in practice as an advocate for not less 
than seven years, and the Special Public Prosecutor has been in practice as an advocate for not less than 
ten years in any  court.  
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public  Prosecutor under this section 
shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the provisions of that Code shall have effect  accordingly.  19  52. Appeal and revisio n.—The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers 
conferred by Chapter XXIX or Chapter XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), on a 
High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court 
of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High  Court.  
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTION  
53. Penalty for benami transaction .—(1) Where any person enters into a benami transaction in order 
to de feat the provisions of any law or to avoid payment of statutory dues or to avoid payment to creditors, 
the beneficial owner, benamidar and any other person who abets or induces any person to enter into the 
benami transaction, shall be guilty of the offence of benami  transaction.  
(2) Whoever is found guilty of the offence of benami transaction referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to twenty -five per cent. of the fair 
market value of the property.  
54. Penalty for false information .—Any person who is required to furnish information under this A ct 
knowingly gives false information to any authority or furnishes any false document in any proceeding 
under this Act, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to five years and  shall also be liable to fine which may extend to ten per 
cent. of the fair market value of the  property.  
1[54A. Penalty for failure to comply with notices or furnish information .—(1) Any person who fails 
to, — 
(i) comply with summons issued under sub -section (1) of section 19; or  
(ii) furnish information as required under section 21, shall be liable to pay penalty of twenty -five 
thousand rupees for each such failure.  
(2) The penalty under sub -section ( 1) shall be imposed by the authority who had issued the  summons or 
called for the information.  
(3) No order under sub -section ( 2) shall be passed by the authority unless the person on whom the 
penalty is to be imposed has been given an opportunity of being heard:  
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed if, s uch person proves that there were good and sufficient 
reasons which prevented him from complying with the summons or furnishing information.  
54B. Proof of entries in records or documents .--The entries in the records or other documents in the 
custody of an authority shall be admitted in evidence in any proceedings for the prosecution of any person 
for an offence under section 3 or this Chapter, as the case may be, and all such entries may be proved either 
by— 
(i) the production of the records or other docume nts in the custody of the authority containing such 
entries; or  
(ii) the production of a copy of the entries certified by the authority having custody of the records or 
other documents under its signature stating that it is a true copy of the original entr ies and that such 
original entries are contained in the records or other documents in its custody.]  
55. Previous sanction .—No prosecution shall be instituted against any person in respect of any 
offence under sections 3, 53 or section 54 without the previo us sanction of the  2[competent authority ].] 
3[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “competent authority ” means a Commissioner, a 
Director, a Principal Commissioner of Income -tax or a Principal Director of Income -tax as defined in 
clause (16), clause (21), clause (34B) and clause (34C), respectively, of  section 2  of the Income -tax Act, 
1961 (43 of 1961).]  
4[CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 179  (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).  
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 2019 , s. 180,  for “ Board ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).  
3. Ins. by s. 180, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).  
4. Subs. by Act 43 of 2016, s. 10, for sections 7 and 8 (w.e.f.  1-11-2016).  
 20  56. Repeal of provisions of certain Acts .—(1) Sections 81, 82 and 94 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 
(2 of 1882), section 66 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and section 281A of the Income -
tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), are hereby  repealed.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the 
continued operation of section 281A of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir.  
57. Certain tr ansfers to be null and void .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Transfer of 
the Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882) or any other law for the time being in force, where, after the issue of a 
notice under section 24, any property referred to in the said no tice is transferred by any mode whatsoever, 
the transfer shall, for the purposes of the proceedings under this Act, be ignored and if the property is 
subsequently confiscated by the Central Government under section 27, then, the transfer of the property 
shall be deemed to be null and  void.  
58. Exemption .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any property relating to 
charitable or religious trusts from the operation of this  Act. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be l aid before each House of Parliament.  
59. Power of Central Government to issue directions, etc .—(1) The Central Government may, from 
time to time, issue such orders, instructions or directions to the authorities or require any person to furnish 
information as it may deem fit for the proper administration of this Act and such authorities and all other 
persons employed in execution of this Act shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and directions 
of the Central  Government.  
(2) In issuing the directions or orders referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may have 
regard to anyone or more of the following criteria,  namely: — 
(a) territorial area;  
(b) classes of  persons;  
(c) classes of cases;  and 
 
(d) any other criterion that may be specified by the Central Government in this  behalf.  
(3) No orders, instructions or directions under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued so as  to— 
(a) require any authority to decide a particular case in a particular manner;  or 
(b) interfere with the discretion of the Adjudicating Authority in the  discharge of its  functions.  
60. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not, save as hereinafter expressly provided, in derogation of any other law for the time being in  force.  
61. Offences to be non -cognizabl e.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence under this Act shall be  non-cognizable.  
62. Offences by companies .—(1) Where a person committing contravention of any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time 
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct 
of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be dee med to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished  accordingly.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1), shall render any person liable to punishment if he proves 
that the contravention took place without his  knowle dge. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken plac e with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
the director, manager, secretary or other officer shal1 also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention  and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished  accordingly.  21  Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means a body corporate, and  includes — 
(i) a firm; and  
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals whether incorporated or not; and 
(b) “director”, in relation  to— 
(i) a firm, means a partner in the  firm;  
(ii) any association of persons or a body of individuals, means any member controlling the 
affairs  thereof.  
63. Notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds .—No notice, summons, order, document or 
other proceeding, furnished or made or issued or taken or purported to have been furnished or made or 
issued or taken in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid, or shall be deemed to be 
invalid merely by reason of any m istake, defect or omission in the notice, summons, order, document or 
other proceeding if the notice, summons, order, document or other proceeding is in substance and effect  
in conformity with or according to the intent and purpose of this  Act. 
64. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie 
against the Government or any officer of the Government or the Appellate Tribunal or the Adjudicating 
Authority established under this Act, for anything done or intended to be done in good faith under this 
Act. 
65. Transfer of pending cases .—(1) Every suit or proceeding in respect of a benami transaction 
pending in any Court (other than a High Court) or Tribunal or before any forum on the date of the 
commencement of this Act shal l stand transferred to the Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate 
Tribunal, as the case may be, having jurisdiction in the  matter.  
(2) Where any suit, or other proceeding stands transferred to the Adjudicating Authority or the 
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section  (1),— 
(a) the court, Tribunal or other forum shall, as soon as may be, after the transfer, forward the 
records of the suit, or other proceeding to the Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate Tribunal, as the 
case may  be; 
(b) the Adjudicating Authority may, on receipt of the records, proceed to deal with the suit, or 
other proceeding, so far as may be, in the same manner as in the case of a reference made under sub -
section ( 5) of section 24, from the stage which was reached before the transfer or from an y earlier 
stage or de novo as the Adjudicating Authority may deem  fit. 
66. Proceedings, etc., against legal representative .—(1) Where a person dies during the course of 
any proceeding under this Act, any proceeding taken against the deceased before his death s hall be 
deemed to have been taken against the legal representative and may be continued against the legal 
representative from the stage at which it stood on the date of the death of the  deceased.  
(2) Any proceeding which could have been taken against the decea sed if he had survived may be 
taken against the legal representative and all the provisions of this Act, except sub -section ( 2) of section 3 
and the provisions of Chapter VII, shall apply  accordingly.  
(3) Where any property of a person has been held benami under sub -section ( 3) of section 26, then, it 
shall be lawful for the legal representative of the person to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, in 
place of the person and the provisions of section 46 shall, so far as may be, apply, or continue to appl y, to 
the appeal.  
67. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in  force.  
68. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this  Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely: — 22  (a) manner of ascertaining the fair market value under clause 16 of section  2; 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(d) the powers and functions of the authorities under sub -section ( 2) of section  18; 
(e) other powers of the authorities under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section  19; 
(f) the form and m anner of furnishing any information to the authority under sub -section ( 2) of 
section  21; 
(g) the manner of provisional attachment of property under sub -section ( 3) of section  24; 
(h) the procedure for confiscation of benami property under the second proviso to sub -section 
(1) of section  27; 
(i) the manner and conditions to receive and manage the property under sub -section ( 1) of  
section  28; 
(j) the manner and conditions of disposal of property vested in the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 3) of section  28; 
(k) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of section  33; 
(l) the manner of prescribing procedure for removal of  Chairperson or Member under sub -
section ( 4) of section  35; 
(m) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) of section  39; 
(n) any power of the Appellate Tribunal under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section  40; 
(o) the form in which appeal shall be filed and the fee for filing the appeal under sub -section ( 1) 
of section  46; 
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, by  rules.  
69. Laying of rules and notifications before Parliament .—Every rule made and notification issued 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament,  
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Ho uses agree in making any modification in the rules or notifications, 
as the case may be, both Houses agree that the rules or notifications, as the case may be, should not be 
made or issued, the rule or notification, as the case may be, shall thereafter hav e effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
notification, as the case may  be. 
70. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may ap pear to be necessary for removing the  difficulty.  
(2) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the commencement 
of this  Act. 
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of  Parliament.  
71. Transitional provision .—The Central Government may, by notification, provide that until the 
Adjudicating Authorities are appointed and the Appellate Tribunal is established under this Act, the 
Adjudicating Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of the Money -Laundering Act, 2002 
(15 of 2003) and the Appellate Tribunal established under section 25 of that Act may discharge the 
                                                      
1. Clauses (b) and ( c) omitted by Act 13 of 2021, s. 158 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2021).  23  functions of the Adjudicating Authority and Appellate Tribunal, respectively, under this  Act.]  
1[72.] Repeal and saving. —(1) The Benami Transactions (Prohibition of the Right to Recover 
Property) Ordinance, 1988 (Ord. 2 of 1988) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
                                                      
1. Section 9 renumbered as section 72 thereof by Act 43 of 2016, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
 
1 
 THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996  
_______  
ARRA NGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
 
_______  
PREAMBLE  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
PART I  
ARBITRA TION  
CHAPTER I  
General provisions  
2. Definitions.  
3. Receipt of written communications.  
4. Waiver o f right to  object.  
5. Extent of judicial intervention.  
6. Administrative assistance.  
CHAPTER II  
Arbitration agreement  
7. Arbitration agreement.  
8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement.  
9. Interim mea sures, etc., by Court.  
CHAPTER III 
Composition of arbitral tribunal  
10. Number of arbitrators.  
11. Appointment of arbitrators.  
11A. Power of Central Government to amend Fourth Schedule . 
12. Grounds for challenge.  
13. Challenge procedure.  
14. Failure or impossibility to act.  
15. Termination of mandate and subst itution of arbitrator.  
CHAPTER IV  
Jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals  
16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction.  
17. Interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal.  
CHAPTER V  
Conduct of arbitral  proceeding s 
18. Equal treatment of parties.  
19. Determina tion of rules of procedure.  
20. Place of arbitration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings.  
22. Language.  
23. Statements of claim and defence.  
24. Hearings and written proceedings.  
25. Default of a party.  
26. [Omitted .]. 
27. Court assistance in taking evidence.  
CHAPTE R VI  
Making of arbitral award and termination of proceedings  
28. Rules applicable to substance of dispute.  
29. Decision making by panel of arbitrators.  
29A.Time limit for arbitral award.  
29B. Fast track procedure.  
30. Settlement.  
31. Form and contents of arbitral award.  
31A. Regime for costs . 
32. Termination of proceedings.  
33. Correction and interpretation of award;  additional award.  
CHAPTER VII  
Recourse against arbitral award  
34. Application for setting aside arbitral award s. 
CHAPTER VIII  
Finality and enforcement of arbitral awards  
35. Finality of arbitral awards.  
36. Enforcement.  
CHAPTER IX  
Appeals  
37. Appealable orders.  
CHAPTER X  
Miscellaneous  
38. Deposits.  
39. Lien on arbitral award and deposits as to costs.  
40. Arbitration agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto.  
41. Provisions in case of i nsolvency.  
42. Jurisdiction.  
42A. Confidentialit y of information.  
42B.  Protection of action taken in good faith.  
43. Limitations.  
43J. Norms for accreditation of arbitrat ors. 
PART II  
ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS  
CHAPTER I  
New York Convention Awards  
44. Defin ition.  
  3 
 SECTIONS  
45. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration.  
46. When foreign award binding.  
47. Evidence.  
48. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards.  
49. Enforcement of foreign awards.  
50. Appealable orders.  
51. Saving.  
52. Chapter II n ot to apply.  
CHAPTER II  
Geneva Convention Awards  
53. Interpretation.  
54. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration.  
55. Foreign awards when binding.  
56. Evidence.  
57. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards.  
58. Enforcement of foreign awards.  
59. Appealable orders.  
60. Savings.  
PART III  
CONCILIATION  
61. Application and scope.  
62. Commencement of conciliation proceedings.  
63. Number of conciliators.  
64. Appointment of conciliators.  
65. Submission of statements to conciliator.  
66. Conciliator not bound by certain enactments.  
67. Role of conciliator.  
68. Administrative ass istance.  
69. Communication between conciliator and parties.  
70. Disclosure of information.  
71. Co-operation of parties with conciliator.  
72. Suggestions by parties for settlement of dispute.  
73. Settlement agreement.  
74. Status and effect of settlement agreement.  
75. Confidentialit y. 
76. Termination of conciliation proceedings.  
77. Resort to arbitral or judicial proceedings.  
78. Costs.  
79. Depos its. 
80. Role of conciliator in other proceedings  . 
81. Admissib ility of evidence in other proceedings.  
PART IV  
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS  
82. Power of High Court to make r ules. 
83. Removal of difficulties.  4 
 SECTIONS  
84. Power to make rules.  
85. Repeal and saving s. 
86. Repeal and saving.  
87. Effect of arbitral and related court proceedings commenc ed prior to 23rd October, 2015.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOU RTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FIFTH  SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.  
APPENDIX . 
 
 
 
 
 
  5 
 THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996  
ACT No. 26 OF 1996  
[16th Augus t, 1996 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, intern ational 
commercial arbitration and enforcement of  foreign arbitral awards as also to define the law 
relating to conciliation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
Preamble .—WHEREAS  the United Nations Commission on International Trade L aw (UNCITRAL) 
has adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law on  International  Commercial Arbitration in 1985;  
ANDWHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations has recommended that all countries give 
due consideration to the  said Model Law, in view of the desirabi lity of uniformity of the law of arbitral 
procedures and the specific needs of international  commercial arbitration practice;  
ANDWHEREAS  the UNCITRAL has adopted the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules in 1980;  
ANDWHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations  has recommended the use of the said 
Rules in cases where a  dispute arises in the context of international commercial relations and the parties 
seek an amicable settlement of that dispute by  recourse to conciliation;  
ANDWHEREAS  the said Model Law and Rules  make significant contribution to the establishment of a 
unified legal framework for  the fair and efficient settlement of disputes arising in international 
commercial relations;  
ANDWHEREAS  it is expedient to make law respecting arbitration and conciliation , taking into account 
the aforesaid Model Law and  Rules;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and 
Concili ation Act, 1996.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
PART I  
ARBITRATION  
CHAPTER I  
General provisions  
2. Definit ions. —(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “arbitration”  means any arbitration whether or not administered by permanent arbitral 
institution;  
(b) “arbitration agreement”  means an agreement referred to in section 7;  
                                                           
1. The proviso  and Explanation  omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central  Laws) Order, 2020, 
vide notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).  
2. 22nd  August, 1996, vide notificat ion No. G.S.R 375(E), dated 22nd  August, 1996, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (i).  6 
  (c) “arbitral award”  includes an interim award;  
 (d) “arbitral tribunal”  means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators;  
1[(e) “Court”  means — 
(i) in the case of an arbitration other than international  commercial arbitration, the principal 
Civil Court of original  jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of  its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide  the questions forming the 
subject -matter of the arbitration if the  same had been the subject -matter of a suit, but do es not 
include  any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or  any Court of Small 
Causes;  
(ii) in the case of international commercial arbitration, the  High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having  jurisdi ction to decide the questions forming the 
subject -matter of  the arbitration if the same had been the subject -matter of a suit, and  in other 
cases, a High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals  from decrees of courts subordinate to that 
High Court; ] 
(f) “international commercial arbitration”  means an arbitration relating to disputes arising out of 
legal relationships, whether  contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in force in 
India and where at least one of the par ties is — 
(i) an indiv idual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any country other than India; 
or 
(ii) a body corporate which is incorpo rated in any country other than India; or  
(iii) 2*** an association or a body of individuals whose central management and control is 
exercised in any country other  than India; or  
(iv) the Government of a foreign country;  
(g) “legal repres entative”  means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person, 
and includes any person who  intermeddles with the estate of the dece ased, and, where a party acts in a 
representative character, the person on whom the estate  devolves on the death of the party so acting;  
(h) “party”  means a party to an arbitration agreement.  
(2) This Part shall apply where the p lace of arbitration is in I ndia:  
3[Provided that subject to an agreement to the contrary, the provisions of  sections 9, 27 and clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 3) of section37 shall also apply to international commercial 
arbitration, even if the place of  arbitration is  outside India, and an arbitral award made or to be made in 
such place is enforceable and recognised under the provisions of Part II of this Act. ] 
(3) This Part shall not affect any other law for the time being in force by virtue of which certain 
disputes may not be submitted to  arbitration.  
(4) This Part except sub -section ( 1) of section 40, sections 41 and 43 shall apply to every arbitration 
under any other enactment for  the time being in force, as if the arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration 
agreem ent and as if that other enactment were an  arbitration agreement, except in so far as the provision s 
of this Part are inconsistent with that other enactment or with any rules  made thereunder.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), and save in so  far as is otherwise provided by any law 
for the time being in force or  in any agreement in force between India and any other country or countries, 
this Part shall apply to all arbitrations and to all  proceedings relating thereto.  
(6) Where this Part, exce pt section 28, leaves the parties free to determine a certain issue, that 
freedom shall include the right of  the parties to authorise any person including an institution, to determine 
that issue.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 2, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. The words “a company or” omitted by s. 2 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e. f. 23 -10-2015).  7 
 (7) An arbitral award made under this Part shall be consider ed as a domestic award.  
(8) Where this Part — 
(a) refers to the fact that the parties have agreed or that they may agree, or  
(b) in any other way refers to an agreement of the parties,  
that agreement shall include any arbitration rules referred to in that a greement.  
(9) Where this Part, other than clause ( a) of section 25 or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 32, 
refers to a claim, it shall also  apply to a counterclaim, and where it refers to a defence, it shall also apply 
to a defence to that counterc laim.  
3. Receipt of written communications .—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by th e parties ,— 
(a) any written communication is deemed to have been received if it is delivered to the addressee 
personally or at his place of  business, habitual residence or mailing  address, and  
(b) if none of the places referred to in clause ( a) can be found after making a reasonable inquiry, a 
written communication is  deemed to have been received if it is sent to the addressee's last known 
place of business, habitual residence or m ailing address  by registered letter or by any other means 
which provides a record of the attempt to deliver it.  
(2) The communication is deemed to have been received on the day it is so delivered.  
(3) This section does not apply to written communications i n respect of proceedings of any judicial 
authority.  
4.Waiver of right to object. —A party who knows that — 
(a) any provision of this Part from which the parties may derogate, or  
(b) any requirement under the arbitration agreement,  
has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the arbitration without stating his objection to such 
non-compliance without  undue delay or, if a time limit is provided for stating that objection, within that 
period of time, shall be deemed to have waived his  right to so object.  
5.Extent of judicial intervention .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, in matters  governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so 
provided in this Part.  
6.Administrative assistance .—In order to facilitate the conduct of the arbitral proceedings, the 
parties, or the arbitral tribunal with the  consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance 
by a suitable institution or person.  
CHAPTER II  
Arbitration agreement  
7. Arbitrat ion agreement .—(1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement”  means an agreement by the 
parties to submit to arbitration all or  certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them 
in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual  or not. 
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of 
a separate agreement.  
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.  
(4) An arbitration agreement is i n writing if it is contained in — 
(a) a document signed by the parties;  
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams  or other means of telecommunication 1[including 
communication through electronic me ans] which  provide a record of the agreement ; or 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 3 (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).  8 
 (c) an exchange of statements of claim and defen ce in which the existence of the agreement is 
alleged by one party and not denied  by the other.  
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an 
arbitration agreement if the contract is  in writing and the refere nce is such as to make that arbitration 
clause part of the contract.  
8.Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement .—1[(1)A judicial 
authority, before which an action is brought in a matter  which is the subject of an arbitr ation agreement 
shall, if a party to the arbitration  agreement or any person claiming through or under him, so applies not 
later than the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute,  then, notwithstanding 
any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or  any Court, refer the parties to arbitration unless it 
finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists. ] 
(2) The application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall not be entertained unless it is accompanied by 
the o riginal arbitration  agreement o r a duly certified copy thereof:  
2[Provided that where the original arbitration agreement or a certified copy thereof is not available 
with the party applying for reference to arbitration under sub -section ( 1), and the said a greement or 
certified copy is retained by the other party to that agreement, then, the party so applying shall file such 
application along with a copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition praying the Court to call upon 
the other party to produce the  original arbitration agreement or its duly certified copy before that Court .] 
(3) Notwithstanding that an application has been made under sub -section ( 1) and that the issue is 
pending before the judicial  authority, an  arbitration may be commenced or conti nued and an arbitral 
award made.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). — 
Insertion of section 8A and section 8B. —After section 8, insert the following sections, namely :– 
“8A. Power of the court, seized of petitions under sections 9 or 11 of th e Act, to refer the 
dispute to Mediation or Conciliation. —(1) If during the pendency of petitions under sections 9 or 
11 of the Act, it appears to the court, that there exists elements of a settlement which may be 
acceptable to the parties, the court may, with the consent of parties, refer the parties, for resolution of 
their disputes, to, -  
(a) mediation; or  
(b) conciliation.  
(2) The procedure for reference of a dispute to media tion is as under – 
(a) where a dispute has been referred for resolution by reco urse to mediation, the procedure 
framed under that Act shall apply;  
(b) in case of a successful resolution of the dispute, the Mediator shall immediately forward 
the mediated set tlement to the referral court;  
(c) on receipt of the mediated settlement, the referral court shall independently apply its 
judicial mind and record a satisfaction that the mediated settlement is genuine, lawful, voluntary, 
entered into without coercion, undue influence, fraud or misrepresentation and that there is no 
other legal im pediment in accepting the same;  
(d) the court shall record a statement on oath of the parties, or their authorised 
representatives, affirming the mediated settlement as well as a clear undertaking of the parties to 
abide by the terms of the settlement;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 4 , for sub -section ( 1) (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  9 
 (e) if satisfied, the court shall pass an order in terms of the settlement;  
(f) if the main petition, in which the reference was made is pending, it shall be disposed of by 
the referral court in terms thereof;  
(g) if the main petition, in which the reference w as made stands disposed of, the mediated 
settlement and the matter shall be listed before the referral court, which shall pass orders in 
accordance with clauses (iii), (iv) and (v);  
(h) such a mediated settlement, shall have the same status and effect as a n arbitral award and 
may be enforced in the manner specified under section 36 of the Act.  
(3) With respect to reference of a dispute to conciliation, the provisions of Part II of this Act shall 
apply as if the conciliation proceedings were initiated by the  parties under the relevant provision of 
this Act.  
8B. Power of the court, seized of matters under sections 34 or 37 of the Act, to refer the 
dispute to Mediation or Conciliation .—(1) If during the pendency of a petition under section 34 or 
an appeal under  section 37 of the Act, it appears to the court, that there exists elements of a settlement 
which may be acceptable to the parties, the court may, with the consent of parties, refer the parties, 
for resolution of their disputes, to: –  
(a) mediation; or  
 (b) conciliation.  
(2) The procedure for reference of a dispute to mediation is as under: - 
(a) where a dispute has been referred for resolution by recourse to mediation, the procedure 
framed under the Act shall apply;  
(b) in case of a successful resolution of  the dispute, the Mediator shall immediately forward 
the mediated settlement to the referral court;  
(c) on receipt of the mediated settlement, the referral court shall independently apply its 
judicial mind and record a satisfaction that the mediated settle ment is genuine, lawful, 
voluntary, entered into without coercion, undue influence, fraud or misrepresentation and that 
there is no other legal impediment in accepting the same;  
(d) the court shall record a statement on oath of the parties, or their author ized 
representatives, affirming the mediated settlement, a clear undertaking of the parties to abide by 
the terms of the settlement as well as statement to the above effect;  
(e) if satisfied, the court shall pass an order in terms of the settlement;  
(f) if  the main petition, in which the reference was made is pending, it shall be disposed of 
by the referral court in terms thereof;  
(g) if the main petition, in which the reference was made stands disposed of, the mediated 
settlement and the matter shall be li sted before the referral court, which shall pass orders in 
accordance with clauses (iii), (iv) and (v);  
(h) such a mediated settlement, shall have the status of a modified arbitral award and may 
be enforced in the manner specified under section 36 of the A ct. 
(3) With respect to reference of a dispute to conciliation, the provisions of Part III of the Act, 
shall apply as if the conciliation proceedings were initiated by the parties under the relevant provision 
of this Act.”  
 10 
 [Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reor ganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, notification 
No. S.O . 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020). ] 
9.Interim me asures , etc., by Court. —1[(1)]A party may, before  or during arbitral proceedings or at 
any time after the making of the arbitral  award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36, 
apply to a court — 
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a mi nor or person of unsound mind for the purposes of 
arbitral proceedings; or  
(ii) for an interim measure of  protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject -matte r of the 
arbitration agreement;  
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;  
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the subject -
matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to  which any question may arise t herein and authorising 
for any of the aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or  building in the possession 
of any party , or authorising any samples to be taken or any observation to be made, or experiment 
to be  tried, which may be necessary o r expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or 
evidence;  
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;  
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the Court to be just and 
convenient,  
and the Court shall have the same power for making orders as it has for the purpose of, and in relation 
to, any proceedings before  it. 
2[(2) Where, before the commencement of the arbitral proceedings, a Court  passes an order for any 
interim measure of protection under sub -section ( 1), the arbitral proceedings shall be commenced within a 
period of ninety days from the date  of such order or within such further time as the Court may determine.  
(3) Once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the Court shall not entertain  an applicatio n under 
sub-section ( 1), unless the Court finds that circumstances exist  which may not render the remedy provided 
under section 17 efficacious.]  
CHAPTER III  
Composition of arbitral tribunal  
10. Number of arbitrators. —(1) The parties are free to determine t he number of arbitrators, 
provided that such number shall not be an  even number.  
(2) Failing the determination referred to in sub -section ( 1), the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole 
arbitrator.  
11. Appointment of arbitrators. —(1) A person of any nat ionality may be an arbitrator, unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties.  
(2) Subject to sub -section ( 6), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator 
or arbitrators.  
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), in a n arbitration with three arbitrators, each 
party shall appoint one  arbitrator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who 
shall act as the presiding arbitrator.  
(4) If the appointment procedure in sub -section ( 3) applies and — 
(a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days from the receipt of a request to do so 
from the other party; or  
                                                           
1. Section 9 shall be r enumbered as  sub-section  (1) thereof by s. 5, Act 3 of 2016  (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  11 
 (b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator within thirty days from the 
date of their appointment,  
the appointment shall be made, upon request of a party, by 1[the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, 
the High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court];  
(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), in an arbitration with a so le arbitrator, if the 
parties fail to agree on the  arbitrator within thirty days from receipt of a request by one party from the 
other party to so agree the appointment shall be made,  upon request of a party, by 1[the Supreme Court or, 
as the case may be, the High Court or any person or instit ution designated by such Court].  
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties, — 
(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or  
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, f ail to reach an agreement expected of them under 
that procedure; or  
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function entrusted to him or it under 
that procedure,  
a party may request 1[the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or any person or 
institution designated by such Court] to take the necessary measure, unless the  agreement on the 
appointment procedure provides other means for securing the appointment.  
2[(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court,  while  considering any application 
under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or sub-section ( 6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or 
order of any  Court, confine to the examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.  
(6B) The designation  of any person or institution by the Supreme Court  or, as the case may be, the 
High Court, for the purposes of this section shall not  be regarded as a delegation of judicial power by the 
Supreme Court or the High  Court.]  
(7) A decision on a matter entruste d by sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or sub -section ( 6) to 3[the 
Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the person or institution designated by such 
Court is final and no appeal including Letters Patent Appeal s hall lie against such dec ision ]. 
4[(8) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the person or institution designated 
by such Court, before appointing an arbitrator, shall seek a disclosure in writing from the prospective 
arbitrator in terms of  sub -section ( 1) of section 12, and have due regard to — 
(a) any qualifications required for the arbitrator by the agreement  of the parties; and  
(b) the contents of the disclosure and other considerations as are  likely to secure the appointment 
of an independent and  impartia l arbitrator .] 
(9) In the case of appointment of sole or third arbitrator in an international commercial arbitration, 
5[the Supreme Court or the person or institution designated by that Court]  may appoint an arbitrator of a 
nationality other than the natio nalities of the parties where the  parties belong to different nationalities.  
6[(10)The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, may  make such scheme as the said 
Court may deem appropriate for dealing with  matters entrusted by sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or 
sub-section ( 6), to it.] 
(11) Where more than one request has been made under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or sub -
section ( 6) to the Chief Justices  of different High Courts or their designates, 7[different High Courts or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6, for “the Chief Justice or any person or institution designated by him” (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).   
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f.  23-10-2015).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the Chief Justice or the person  or institution designated by him is final” (w.e .f. 23-10-2015).  
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6 , for sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f .23-10-2015).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “the Chief Ju stice of India of India or the person or institution designated by him” (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 10) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the Ch ief Justices of different High C ourts or their designates, t he Chief Justice or his designate to 
whom the request has been first made” (w.e.f 23 -10-2015).  12 
 their de signates, the High Court or its designate to whom the request has been first made]  under the  
relevant sub -section shall alone be competent to decide on the request.  
1[(12) (a) Where the matters referred to in sub -sections ( 4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub -section ( 10) arise 
in an international commercial arbitration, the reference to the “Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court” in those sub -sections shall be construed as a reference to the “Supreme Court”; and  
(b) Where the matters referred to i n sub -sections ( 4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub -section ( 10) arise in any 
other arbitration, the reference to “the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court” in those 
sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the “High Court” within whose  local limits the principal 
Civil Court referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 is situate, and where the High Court 
itself is the Court referred to in that clause, to that High Court.]  
2[(13) An application made under this section for ap pointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators shall be 
disposed of by the Supreme Court or the High Court or the person or institution designated by such Court, 
as the case maybe, as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to dispose of the ma tter 
within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party.  
(14) For the purpose of determination of the fees of the arbitral tribunal and the manner of its 
payment to the arbitral tribunal, the High Court may frame such r ules as may be necessary, after taking 
into consideration the rates specified in the Fourth Schedule.  
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that this sub -section shall not apply to 
international commercial arbitration and in arbitr ations (other than international commercial arbitration) 
in case where parties have agreed for determinatio n of fees as per the rules of an  arbitral institution.]  
3[11A. Power of Central Government to amend Fourth Schedule. —(1) If the Central Government 
is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Fourth Schedule and thereupon the Fourth Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended 
accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or , as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by the both Houses of Parliament.]  
12. Grounds for challenge .—4[(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible  
appointment as an arbitrator, he shall di sclose in writing any circumstances, — 
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past or  present relationship with or 
interest in any of the parties or in relation to  the subject -matter in dispute, whether financial, business, 
professional  or other kind, which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his  independence or 
impartiality; and  
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to  the arbitration and in 
particular his ability to complete the entire arbi tration  within a period of twelve months . 
Explanation 1.—The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule shall guide in determining whether 
circumstances exist which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an 
arbitrator.  
Explanati on 2.—The disclosure shall be made by such person in the form specified in the Sixth 
Schedule.]  
(3) An arbitrator may be ch allenged only if — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6, for sub -section ( 12) (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 6,  ibid.(w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 7 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
4. Subs. by s. 8 , ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  13 
 (a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality, 
or 
(b) he does  not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties.  
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or in whose appointment he has 
participated, only for reasons of which he   becomes aware after the appointment has been made.  
1[(5) Notwiths tanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person  whose relationship, with the 
parties or counsel or the subject -matter of the  dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in the 
Seventh Schedule  shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbi trator:  
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability  
of this sub -section by an express agreement in writing. ]  
13.Challenge procedure. —(1) Subject to sub -section ( 4), the parties are free to agree on  a procedure 
for challenging an arbitrator.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1), a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator 
shall, within fifteen days  after becoming aware of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after 
becom ing aware of any circumstances referred to in sub -section( 3) of section 12, send a written statement 
of the reasons for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal.  
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub -section ( 2) withdraws from his office or the othe r party 
agrees to the challenge, the  arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge.  
(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure under sub -
section ( 2) is not successful,  the arbitral tribunal shall continue the  arbitral proceedings and make an 
arbitral award.  
(5) Where an arbitral award is made under sub -section ( 4), the party challenging the arbitrator may 
make an application for setting  aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34.  
(6) Where an a rbitral award is set aside on an application made under sub -section ( 5), the Court may 
decide as to whether the  arbitrator who is challenged is entitled to any fees.  
14. Failure or impossibility to act .—(1) 2[The mandate of an  arbitrator shall terminate an d he shall 
be substituted by another arbitrator , if]— 
(a) he becomes de jure or de facto  unable to perform his functions or for other reasons fails to act 
without undue delay; and  
(b) he withdraws from his office or the parties agree to the termination of his mandate.  
(2) If a controversy remains concerning any of the grounds referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), 
a party may, unless  otherwise agreed by the parties, apply to the Court to decide on the termination of the 
mandate.  
(3) If, under this se ction or sub -section ( 3) of section 13, an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a 
party agrees to the termination  of the mandate of an arbitrator, it shall not imply acceptance of the validity 
of any ground referred to in this section or sub -section( 3) of section 12.  
15. Termination of mandate and substitution of arbitrator .—(1) In addition to the circumstances 
referred to in section 13 or section 14,the mandate of a n arbitrator shall terminate — 
(a) where he withdraws from office for any reason; or  
(b) by or pursuant to agreement of the parties.  
(2) Where the mandate of an arbit rator terminates, a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed according 
to the rules that were  applicable to the appointment of the arbitrator being replaced.  
(3) Unless otherwise a greed by the parties, where an arbitrator is replaced under sub -section ( 2), any 
hearings previously held maybe repeated at the discretion of the arbitral tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015). 
2. Sub s. by s. 9, ibid., for  “The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if” (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  14 
 (4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, an order or ruling of the arbitral tribunal mad e prior to the 
replacement of an arbitrator  under this section shall not b e invalid solely because there has been a change 
in the composition of the arbitral tribunal.  
CHAPTER IV  
Jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals  
16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rul e on its jurisdiction. —(1) The arbitral tribunal may rule 
on its own jurisdiction, including ruling  on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the 
arbitration agreem ent, and for that purpose, — 
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as an agreement 
independent of the other terms of the  contract; and  
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure  the 
invalidity of the arbitration clause.  
(2) A plea th at the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the 
submission of the statement of  defence; however, a party shall not be precluded from raising such a plea 
merely because that he has  appointed , or participated in  the app ointment of, an arbitrator.  
(3) A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding th e scope of its authority shall b e raised as soon as the 
matter alleged to be beyond  the scope of its authority is raised during the arbitral proceedings.  
(4) The arbitral trib unal may, in either of the cases referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), 
admit a later plea if it considers  the delay justified.  
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) and, 
where the ar bitral tribunal takes a  decision rejecting the plea, continue with the arbitral proceedings and 
make an arbitral award.  
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make an application for setting aside such an 
arbitral award in accordance with  section 34.  
1[17. Interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal .—(1) A party may, during the arbitral 
proceedings 2***, apply to the arbitral tribunal — 
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound  mind for the purposes of 
arbitral pro ceedings; or  
(ii) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which  are the subject -matter of the 
arbitration agreement;  
(b) securing the amount in dis pute in the arbitration;  
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or  thing which is the subject -
matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to  which any question may arise therein and authorising 
for any of the  aforesaid purposes any p erson to enter upon any land or building in the  possession 
of any party, or authorising any samples to be taken, or any  observation to be made, or 
experiment to be tried, which may be necessary  or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full 
information or evidence;  
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;  
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the  arbitral tribunal to be just 
and convenient,  
and the arbitral tribunal shall have the same power for making orders, as the  court has for the purpose of, 
and in relation to, any proceedings before it.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 10 , for section 17 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
2. The words and figures “or at any time after the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with 
section 36” omitted by Act 33 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  15 
 (2) Subject to any orders passed in an appeal under section 37, any order  issued by the arbitral 
tribunal under this section shall be deemed to be an order of the  Court for all pu rposes and shall be 
enforceable under the Code of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) , in the same manner as if it were an order 
of the Court. ] 
CHAPTER V  
Conduct of arbitral proceedings  
18. Equal treatment of parties .—The parties shall be treated with equalit y and each party shall be 
given a full opportunity to presen t this case.  
19. Determination of rules of procedure. —(1) The arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or the  Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) . 
(2) Subject to this Part, the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral 
tribunal in conducting its  proceedings.  
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), the arbitral tribunal may, subject to this Part, 
conduct  the proceedings in the  manner it considers appropriate.  
(4) The power of the arbitral tribunal under sub -section ( 3) includes the power to determine the 
admissibility, relevance, materiality  and weight of any evidence.  
20. Place of arbitration .—(1) The pa rties are free to agree on the place of arbitration.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1), the place of arbitration shall be determined 
by the arbitral tribunal having  regard to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience o f the 
parties.  
(3) Notwithstanding sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the arbitral tribunal may, unless otherwise 
agreed by the parties, meet at anyplace it considers appropriate for consultation among its members, for 
hearing witnesses , experts or the pa rties, or for inspection of  documents, goods or other property.  
21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings. —Unless otherwise agreed by the pa rties, the arbitral 
proceedings  in respect of a  particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that d ispute to 
be referred to arbitration  is received by the  respondent.  
22. Language. —(1) The parties are free to agree upon  the language or languages to be  used in the 
arbitral proceedings.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1), the arbitra l tribunal shall determine the 
language or languages to be used in  the arbitral proceedings.  
(3) The agreement or determination, unless otherwise specified, shall apply to any written statement 
by a party, any hearing and  any arbitral award, decision or ot her communication by the arbitral tribunal.  
(4) The arbitral tribunal may order that any documentary evidence shall be accompanied by a 
translation into the language  or languages agreed  upon by the parties or determined by the arbitral 
tribunal.  
23. Statem ents of claim and defence. —(1) Within the period of time agreed upon by the parties or 
determined by the arbitral tribunal,  the claimant shall state the facts supporting his claim, the points at 
issue and the relief or remedy sought, and the respondent sha ll state his defence in respect of these 
particulars, unless the parties have otherwise agreed as to the required elements of those  statements.  
(2) The parties may submit with their statements all documents they consider to be relevant or may 
add a referen ce to the  documents or other evidence they will submit.  
1[(2A) The respondent, in support of his case, may also submit a counterclaim or plead a set -off, 
which shall be adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal, if such counterclaim or set -off falls within  the 
scope of the arbitration agreement. ] 
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, either party may amend or supplement his claim or 
defence during the course of the  arbitral proceedings, unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate 
to allow the amendment or supplement having regard to  the delay in making it.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 11  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  16 
 1[(4) The statement of claim and defence under this section shall be completed within a period of six 
months from the date the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be, recei ved notice, in writing of 
their appointment.]  
24. Hearings and written proceedings. —(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral 
tribunal shall decide whether to hold  oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral argument, 
or wheth er the proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of  documents an d other materials:  
Provided that the arbitral tribunal shall hold  oral hearings, at an appropriate stage of the proceedings, 
on a request by a party, unless  the parties have agreed that no o ral hearing shall be held : 
2[Provided further that the arbitral tribunal shall, as far as possible, hold oral hearings for the 
presentation of evidence or for oral argument on day -to-day basis, and not grant any adjournments unless 
sufficient cause is made  out, and may impose costs including exemplary costs on the party seeking 
adjournment without any sufficient cause. ] 
(2) The parties shall be given sufficient advance notice of any hearing and of any meeting of the 
arbitral tribunal for the purposes of  inspection of documents, goods or other property.  
(3) All statements, documents or other information suppl ied to, or applications made to  the arbitral 
tribunal by one party shall be  communicated to the other party, and any expert report or evidentiary 
documen t on which the arbitral tribunal may rely in making its  decision shall be communicated to the 
parties.  
25. Default of a party. —Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where, witho ut showing sufficient 
cause, — 
(a) the claimant fails to communicate his state ment of claim in accordance with sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23, the arbitral tribunal  shall terminate the proceedings;  
(b) the respondent fails to communicate his statement of defence in accordance with sub -section 
(1) of section 23, the arbitral  tribunal shall continue the proceedings without treating that failure in 
itself as an admission of the allegations by the claimant 3[and shall have the discretion to treat the 
right of the respondent to file such statement of defence as having been forfeited] . 
(c) a party fails to appear at an oral hearing or to produce documentary evidence, the arbitral 
tribunal may continue the proceedings  and make the arbitral award on the evidence before it.  
26. Expert appointed by arbitral tribunal. —(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral 
tribunal may — 
(a) appoint one or more experts to report to it on specific issues to be determined by the arbitral 
tribunal, and  
(b) require a party to give the expert any relevant information or to produce, or to provide access  
to, any relevant documents, goods or other property for his inspection . 
(2) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, if a party so requests or if the arbitral tribunal considers it 
necessary, the expert shall, after delivery of his written or oral report, participate  in an oral hearing where 
the parties have the opportunity to put questions to him and to present expert witnesses in order to testify 
on the points at issue . 
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the expert shall, on the request of a part y, make available 
to that party for examination all documents, goods or other property in the possession of the expert with 
which he was provided in order to prepare his report . 
27. Court assistance in taking evidence. —(1) The arbitral tribunal, or a party with the approval of 
the arbitral tribunal, may apply to  the Court for assistance in taking evidence.  
(2) The application shall specify — 
(a) the names and addresses of the  parties and the arbitrators;  
(b) the general nature of the claim and the relief soug ht; 
(c) the evidence to be obtained, in particular, — 
(i) the name and address of any person to be heard as witness or expert witness and a 
statement of the subject -matter of the  testimony required;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
2. Ins. by  Act 3 of 2016,  s. 12 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  17 
 (ii) the description of an y document to be produced or pro perty to be inspected.  
(3) The Court may, within its competence and according to its rules on taking evidence, execute the 
request by  ordering that the  evidence be provided directly to the arbitral tribunal.  
(4) The Court may , while making an order under s ub-section ( 3), issue the same processes to 
witnesses as it may issue in suits  tried before it.  
(5) Persons failing to attend in accordance with such process, or making any other default, or refusing 
to give their evidence, or guilty  of any contempt to the  arbitral tribunal during the conduct of arbitral 
proceedings, shall be subject to the like disadvantages,  penalties and punishments by order of the Court 
on the representation of the arbitral tribunal as they would incur for the like  offences in  suits tri ed before 
the Court.  
(6) In this section the expression “Processes”  includes summonses and commissions for the 
examination of witnesses and  summonses to produce documents.  
CHAPTER VI  
Making of arbitral award and termination of proceedings  
28. Rules applica ble to substance of dispute .—(1) Where the place of arbit ration is situate in 
India, — 
(a) in an arbitration other than an international commercial arbitration, the arbitral tribunal shall 
decide the dispute submitted to  arbitration in accordance with the s ubstantive law for the time being 
in force in India;  
(b) in internati onal commercial arbitration, — 
(i) the arbitral tribunal shall decide  the dispute in accordance with the rules of law designated 
by the parties as applicable to the  substance of the disput e; 
(ii) any designation by the parties of the law or legal system of a given country shall be 
construed, unless otherwise expressed, as  directly referring to the substantive law of that country 
and not to its conflict of laws rules;  
(iii) failing any desig nation of the law under clause ( a) by the parties, the arbitral tribunal 
shall apply the rules of law it considers to  be appropriate given all the circumstances surrounding 
the dispute.  
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall decide ex aequoet bono or as  amiable c ompositeur  only if the parties 
have expressly authorised it to  do so.  
1[(3) While deciding and making an award, the arbitral tribunal shall, in all cases, take into account 
the terms of the contract and trade usages applicable to the transaction. ] 
29.Decis ion making by panel of arbitrators .—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, in arbitral 
proceedings with more than one  arbitrator, any decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a 
majority of all its members.  
(2) Notwithstanding sub -section ( 1), if authorised by the parties or all the members of the arbitral 
tribunal, questions of procedure  may be decided by the presiding arbitrator.  
2[29A. Time limit for arbitral award .—3[(1)The award in matters other than international 
commercial arbitration sh all be made by the arbitral  tribunal within a period of twelve months from the 
date of completion of pleadings under sub -section ( 4) of section 23:  
Provided that the award in the matter of international commercial arbitration may be made as 
expeditiously a s possible and endeavor may be made to dispose of the matter within a period of twelve 
months from the date of completion of pleadings under sub -section ( 4) of section 23 .] 
(2) If the award is made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral  tribunal enters upon 
the reference, the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to receive such  amount of additional fees as the parties 
may agree.  
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified in sub -section ( 1) for making award for a 
further pe riod not exceeding six months.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 14 , for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Ins. b y Act 3 of 2016 , s. 15 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 6, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  18 
 (4) If the award is  not made within the period specified in sub -section ( 1) or the  extended period 
specified under sub -section ( 3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall  terminate unless the Court has, 
either prior to or aft er the expiry of the period so  specified, extended the period:  
Provided that while extending the period under this sub -section, if the Court  finds that the 
proceedings have been delayed for the reasons attributable to the  arbitral tribunal, then, it may or der 
reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding  five per cent. for each month of such delay.  
1[Provided further that where an application under sub -section (5) is pending, the mandate of the 
arbitrator shall continue till the disposal of the said a pplication:  
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of being heard before the fees is 
reduced.]  
(5) The extension of period referred to in sub -section ( 4) may be on the  application of any of the 
parties and may be granted only for s ufficient cause and on  such terms and conditions as may be imposed 
by the Court.  
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub -section ( 4), it shall be open to  the Court to substitute 
one or all of the arbitrators and if one or all of the arbitrators  are substituted, the arbitral proceedings shall 
continue from the stage already reached  and on the basis of the evidence and material already on record, 
and the arbitrator(s)appointed under this section shall be deemed to have received the said evidence and  
material.  
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this section, the arbitral  tribunal thus 
reconstituted shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously  appointed arbitral tribunal.  
(8) It shall be open to the Court to impose actua l or exemplary costs upon any  of the parties under this 
section.  
(9) An application filed under sub -section ( 5) shall be disposed of by the Court  as expeditiously as 
possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter  within a period of sixty day s from the date 
of service of notice on the opposite party.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). — 
Amendment of sections 29A. — 
(a) for sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: ––  
“(1) The award shall be made wi thin a period of twelve months from the date the arbitral tribunal 
enters upon the reference.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, an arbitral tribunal shall be deemed to have 
entered upon the reference on the date on which the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may 
be, have received notice, in writing, of their appointment.”;  
(b) in sub -section (4), omit second and third provisos.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020) .] 
29B. Fast track procedure. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, t he parties to an  
arbitration agreement, may, at any stage either before or at the time of appointment of  the arbitral tribunal, 
agree in writing to have their dispute resolved by fast track  procedure specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(2) The parties to the arb itration agreement, while agreeing for resolution of  dispute by fast track 
procedure, may agree that the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a  sole arbitrator who shall be chosen by the 
parties.  
(3) The arbitral tribunal shall follow the following procedure  while conducting  arbitration 
proceedings under sub -section ( 1):— 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 6 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  19 
 (a) The arbitral  tribunal shall decide the dispute on the basis of written  pleadings, documents and 
submissions filed by the parties without any oral  hearing;  
(b) The arbitral tribunal shall  have power to call for any further information  or clarification from 
the parties in addition to the pleadings and documents filed  by them;  
(c) An oral hearing may be held only, if, all the parties make a request or if  the arbitral tribunal 
considers it ne cessary to have oral hearing for clarifying  certain issues;  
(d) The arbitral tribunal may dispense with any technical formalities, if an  oral hearing is held, 
and adopt such procedure as deemed appropriate for  expeditious disposal of the case.  
(4) The awar d under this section shall be made within a period of six months  from the date the arbitral 
tribunal enters upon the reference.  
(5) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub -section ( 4), the  provisions of sub -
sections ( 3) to ( 9) of sectio n 29A shall apply to the proceedings.  
(6) The fees payable to the arbitrator and the manner of payment of the fees shall  be such as may be 
agreed between the arbitrator and the parties. ] 
30. Settlement. —(1) It is not incompatible with an arbitration agreem ent for an arbitral tribunal to 
encourage settlement of the dispute  and, with the agreement of the parties, the arbitral tribunal may use 
mediation, conciliation or other procedures at any time during  the arbitral proceedings to encourage 
settlement.  
(2) If, during arbitral proceedings, the parties settle the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the 
proceedings and, if requested  by the parties and not objected to by the arbitral tribunal, record the 
settlement in the form of an arbitral award on a greed terms.  
(3) An arbitral award on agreed terms shall be made in accordance with section 31 and shall state that 
it is an arbitral award.  
(4) An arbitral award on agreed terms shall have the same status and effect as any other arbitral award 
on the subs tance of the  dispute.  
31. Form and contents of arbitral award. —(1) An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall 
be signed by the members of the  arbitral tribunal.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), in arbitral proceedings with more than one a rbitrator, the 
signatures of the majority of all the  members of the arbitral tribunal shall be sufficient so long as the 
reason for any omitted signature is stated.  
(3) The arbitral award shall state the reasons upon  which it is based, unless — 
(a) the part ies have agreed that no reasons are to be given, or  
(b) the award is an arbitral award on agreed terms under section 30.  
(4) The arbitral award shall state its date and the place of arbitration as determined in accordance with 
section 20 and the award  shall be deemed to have been made at that place.  
(5) After the arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered to each party.  
(6) The arbitral tribunal may, at any time during the arbitral proceedings, make an interim arbitral 
award on any matter with  respect  to which it may make a final arbitral award.  
(7) (a) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in so far as an arbitral award is for the 
payment o f money, the arbitral  tribunal may include in the sum for which the award is made interest, a t 
such rate as it deems reasonable, on the whole or any part  of the money, for the whole or any part of the 
period between the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on which  the award is made.  
1[(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral a ward shall, unless the award otherwise directs, carry 
interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the current rate of interest prevalent on the date of award, 
from the date of award to the date of payment . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 16 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  20 
 Explanation. —The expression “current rate of  interest” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
under clause ( b) of section 2 of the Interest Act, 1978  (14 of 1978) .] 
1[(8) The costs of an arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal in accordance with section  31A.]  
Explanation. —For the purpose of clause ( a), “costs”  means reasonable costs relating to — 
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and witnesses,  
(ii) legal fees and expenses,  
(iii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration, and  
(iv) any other ex penses incurred in connection with the arbitral proceedings and the arbitral 
award.  
2[31A. Regime for costs. —(1) In relation to any arbitration proceeding or a proceeding under any of  
the provisions of this Act pertaining to the arbitration, the Court or a rbitral tribunal,  notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) , shall have  the discretion to 
determine — 
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;  
(b) the amount of such costs; and  
(c) when such costs are t o be paid.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, “costs” means reasonable  costs relating to — 
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, Courts and witnesses;  
(ii) legal fees and expenses;  
(iii) any administration fees of the institution supe rvising the  arbitration; and  
(iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral or Court  proceedings and the 
arbitral award.  
(2) If the Court or arbitral tribunal decides to make an order as to payment of  costs, — 
(a) the general rule is that the unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay  the costs of the 
successful party; or  
(b) the Court or arbitral tribunal may make a different order for reasons to  be recorded in writing.  
(3) In determining the costs, the Court or arbitral tribunal shall hav e regard to all  the circumstances, 
including — 
(a) the conduct of all the parties;  
(b) whether a party has succeeded partly in the case;  
(c) whether the par ty had made a frivolous counter claim leading to delay  in the disposal of the 
arbitral proceedings; an d 
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle the dispute is made by a party  and refused by the other 
party.  
(4) The Court or arbitral tribunal may make any order under this section including  the order that a 
party shall pay — 
(a) a proportion of another par ty’s costs;  
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs;  
(c) costs from or until a certain date only;  
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;  
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;  
                                                           
2. Subs. by s. 1 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s.17, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  21 
 (f ) costs relating only to  a distinct part of the proceedings; and  
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date . 
(5) An agreement which has the effect that a party is to pay the whole or part of  the costs of the 
arbitration in any event shall be only valid if such agreement i s made  after the dispute in question has 
arisen .] 
32. Termination of proceedings. —(1) The arbitral proceedings shall be terminated by the final 
arbitral award or by an order of the  arbitral tribunal under sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall is sue an order for the termination of th e arbitral proceedings 
where — 
(a) the claimant withdraws his claim, unless the respondent objects to the order and the 
arbitral tribunal recognises a legitimate  interest on his part in obtaining a final settlement of t he 
dispute,  
(b) the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings, or  
(c) the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason 
become unnecessary or impossible.  
(3) Subject to section 33 and sub -section ( 4) of section 34, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal shall 
terminate with the termination of  the arbitral proceedings.  
33. Correction and interpretation of award; additional award .—(1) Within thirty days from the 
receipt of the arbitral award, unless  another period of time has been  agreed upon by the parties — 
(a) a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to correct any 
computation errors, any clerical  or typographical errors or any other errors of a similar nature 
occurring in the award;  
(b) if so agreed by the parties, a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral 
tribunal to give an interpretation of a  specific point or part of the award.  
(2) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub -section ( 1) to be justified, it shall 
make the correction or give the  interpretation within thirty days from the receipt of the request and the 
interpretation shall form part of the arbitral award.  
(3) The a rbitral tribunal may correct any  error of the type r eferred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), 
on its own initiative, within thirty  days from the date of the arbitral award.  
(4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party with notice to the other party, may request, within 
thirty days from the receipt  of the arbitral award, the arbitral tribunal to make an  additional arbitral award 
as to claims presented in the arbitral proceedings but  omitted from the arbitral award.  
(5) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub -section ( 4) to be j ustified, it shall 
make the additional arbitral award  within sixty days from the receipt of such request.  
(6) The arbitral tribunal may extend, if necessary, the period of time within which it shall make a 
correction, give an interpretation or  make an addi tional arbitral award under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section 
(5). 
(7) Section 31 shall apply to a correction or interpretation of the arbitral award or to an additional 
arbitral award made under this  section.  
CHAPTER VII  
Recourse against arbitral award  
34. Application for setting  aside arbitral award .—(1) Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award 
may be made only by an  application for setting aside such award in accordance with sub -section ( 2) and 
sub-section ( 3). 
(2) An arbitral award may be s et aside by  the Court only if — 
(a) the party making the appli cation 1[establishes on the basis of the record of the arbitral tribunal 
that]— 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 7, for “furnishes proof that” (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  22 
 (i) a party was under some incapacity, or  
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it 
or, failing any indication thereon, under  the law for the time being in force; or  
(iii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an 
arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or  was otherwise unable to present his case; or  
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on matter s beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration:  
Provided that, if  the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those 
not so submitted, only that part of the  arbitral award which contains decisions on matters not 
submitted to arbitration may be set aside; or  
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance 
with the agreement of the parties, unless  such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this 
Part from which the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement, was  not in accordance 
with t his Par t; or 
(b) the Court finds that — 
(i) the subject -matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law 
for the time being in force, or  
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India.  
1[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if, — 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation 
of section 75 or section 81; or  
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or  
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.  
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the 
fundamental pol icy of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute. ] 
2[(2A) An arbitral award arising out of arbitrations other than international commercial arbitrations, 
may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is vitia ted by patent illegality 
appearing on the face of the  award:  
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an erroneous application of the 
law or by re appreciation of evidence.]  
(3) An application for setting aside may not be made after three months have elapsed from the date on 
which the party making that  application had received the arbitral award  or, if a request had been made 
under section 33, from the date on which that request  had been disposed of by the arbitral tribunal:  
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
making the application within the  said period of three months it  may entertain the application within a 
further period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Court may, where it is appropriate and it is 
so requested by a party,  adjourn the proceedings for a period of time determined by it in order to give the 
arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume the  arbitral proceedings or to take such other action as in the 
opinion of arbitral tribunal will eliminate the grounds for setting aside the  arbitral award.  
                                                           
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 18,  for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015 ). 23 
 1[(5) An application under this section shall be filed by a party only after  issuing a prior notice to t he 
other party and such application shall be  accompanied by an affidavit by the applicant endorsing 
compliance with the  said requirement.  
(6) An application under this section shall be disposed of expeditiously,  and in any event, within a period of one 
year from the date on which the notice  referred to in sub -section ( 5) is served upon the other party.]  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).  
Amendment of section 34. — 
(i) after sub -section (2), insert the following sub -section, namely: -  
“(2A) An arbitral award may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is 
vitiated by patent illegality appearing on the face of the award:  
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an erroneous application of 
the law or by re -appreciation of evidence.”;  
(ii) in sub -section (3), – 
(i) for  “three months” substitute, “six months”;  
(ii) in proviso thereto, for, “three months” and “thirty days” substitute respectively “six months” 
and “sixty days”.  
[Vide the Jammu and  Kashmir Reorganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020,  notification 
No. S.O . 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020) .] 
CHAPTER VIII  
Finality and enforcement of arbitral awards  
35. Finality of arbitral awards. —Subject to this Part an arbitral award shall be final and binding on 
the parties and persons claiming  under them respectively.  
2[36. Enforcement. —(1) Where the time  for making an application to set aside the arbitral award  
under section 34 has expired, then, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), such  award shall be 
enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in the same 
manner as if it were a decree of the court.  
(2) Where an application to set aside the arbitral award has been filed in the  Court under section 34, 
the filing of such an application shall not by itself render that  award unenforceable, unless the C ourt 
grants an order of stay of the operation of the  said arbitral award in accordance with the provisions of  
sub-section ( 3), on a separate  application made for that purpose.  
(3) Upon filing of an application under sub -section ( 2) for stay of the operati on of the arbitral award, 
the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit,  grant stay of the operation of such award for 
reasons to be recorded in writing:  
Provided that the Court shall, while considering the application for grant of  stay in t he case of an 
arbitral award for payment of money, have due regard to the  provisions for grant of stay of a money 
decree under the provisions of the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 18  (w.e.f . 23-10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 19,  ibid., for section 36 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  24 
 1[Provided further that where the Court is satisfied that a Prima facie  case is made out that, — 
(a) the ar bitration agreement or contract which is the basis of the award; or  
(b) the making of the award,  
was induced or effected by fraud or corruption, it shall stay the award unconditionally pending disposal of 
the chal lenge under section 34 to the award.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the above proviso shall apply to 
all court cases arising out of or in relation to arbitral proceedings, irrespective of whether the arbitral or 
court p roceedings were commenced prior to or after the commencement of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 (3 of 2016) .] 
CHAPTER IX  
Appeals  
37. Appealable orders .—(1) 2[Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in f orce, an appeal]  shall lie from the following orders (and from no others) to the Court authorised 
by law to hear  appeals from original decrees of the Cou rt passing the order, namely: — 
3[(a) refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under section 8;  
 (b) granting or refusing to grant any measure under section 9;  
(c) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under section 34. ] 
(2) Appeal shall also lie to a court from an or der of the arbitral tribunal — 
(a) accepting the plea referred to in s ub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 16; or  
(b) granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under section 17.  
(3) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in th is 
section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.  
CHAPTER X  
Miscellaneous  
38. Deposits .—(1) The arbitral tribunal may fix the amount of the depo sit or supplementary deposit, 
as the case may be, as an  advance for the costs referred to in sub -section ( 8) of sectio n 31, which it 
expects will be incurred in respect of the claim submitted  to it: 
Provided that where, apart from the claim, a counter -claim has been submitted to the arbitral tribunal, 
it may fix separate amount of  deposit for the claim and counter -claim.  
(2) The deposit referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be payable in equal shares by the parties:  
Provided that where one party fails to pay his share of the deposit, the other party may pay that share:  
Provided further that where the other party also does n ot pay the aforesaid share in respect of the 
claim or the counter -claim, the  arbitral tribunal may suspend or terminate the arbitral proceedings in 
respect of such claim or counter -claim, as the case may be.  
(3) Upon termination of the arbitral proceedings , the arbitral tribunal shall render an accounting to the 
parties of the deposits  received and shall return any unexpended balance to the party or parties, as the case 
may be.  
39. Lien on arbitral award and deposits as to costs .—(1) Subject to the provisio ns of sub -section 
(2) and to any provision to the  contrary in the arbitration agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall have a lien 
on the arbitral award for any unpaid costs of the  arbitration.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2021, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 3-10-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 8, for “An appeal” (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 20, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  25 
 (2) If in any case an arbitral tribunal refuses to deliver its a ward except on payment of the costs 
demanded by it, the Court may, on  an application in this behalf, order that the arbitral tribunal shall 
deliver the arbitral award to the applicant on payment into Court by  the applicant of the costs demanded, 
and shall,  after suc h inquiry, if any, as it thinks  fit, further order that out of the money so paid  into Court 
there shall be paid to the arbitral tribunal by way of costs such sum as the Court may consider reasonable 
and that the  balance of the money, if any, shal l be refunded to the applicant.  
(3) An application under sub -section ( 2) may be made by any party unless the fees demanded have 
been fixed by written  agreement between him and the arbitral tribunal, and the arbitral tribunal shall be 
entitled to appear and  be heard on any such  application.  
(4) The Court may make such orders as it thinks fit respecting the costs of the arbitration where any 
question arises respecting such  costs and the arbitral award contains no sufficient provision concerning 
them.  
40. Arbi tration agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto .—(1) An arbitration 
agreement shall not be discharged by  the death of any party thereto either as respects the deceased or as 
respects any other p arty, but shall in such event be en forceable by or against the legal representative of 
the deceased.  
(2) The mandate of an arbitrator shall not be terminated by the death of any party by whom he was 
appointed.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any law by virtue of which any ri ght of action 
is extinguished by the death of a  person.  
41. Provisions in case of insolvency. —(1) Where it is provided by a term in a contract to which an 
insolvent is a party that any dispute  arising there  out or in connection therewith shall be submitted  to 
arbitration, the said term shall, if the receiver adopts the contract,  be enforceable by or against him so far 
as it relates to any such dispute.  
(2) Where a person who has been adjudged an insolvent had, before the commencement of the 
insolvency proce edings, become a  party to a n arbitration agreement, and any matter to which the 
agreement applies is required to be determined in connection with, or  for the purposes of, the insolvency 
proceedings , then, if the case is one to which sub -section ( 1) does no t apply, any other party or  the 
receiver may apply to the judicial authority having jurisdiction in the insolvency proceedings for an order 
directing that the matter  in question shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance  with the arbitration 
agreement , and the judicial authority may, if it is of  opinion that, having regard to all the circumstances of 
the case, the matter ought to be determined by arbitration, make an order  accordingly.  
(3) In this section the expression “receiver”  includes an Official Assignee.  
42. Jurisdiction. —Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part or in any other law for 
the time being in force, where with  respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this Part has 
been made in a Court, that Court alone  shall have  jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all 
subsequent applications arising out of that agreement and the arbitral proceedings  shall be made in that 
Court and in no other Court.  
1[42A. Confidentiality of information. —Notwithstanding anyt hing contained by any other law for 
the time being in force, the arbitrator, the arbitral institution and the parties to the arbitration agreement 
shall maintain confidentially of all arbitral proceedings except award where its disclosure is necessary for 
the purpose of implementation and enforcement of award . 
42B. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the arbitrator for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the  rules or 
regulations made thereunder .] 
43. Limitations. —(1) The Li mitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , shall  apply to arbitrations as it applies 
to proceedings in court.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 9 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  26 
 (2) For the purposes of this section and the Lim itation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , an arbitr ation shall be 
deemed to have commenced  on the date referred  to in section 21.  
(3) Where an arbit ration agreement to submit fu ture disputes to arbitration provides that any claim to 
which the agreement applies  shall be barred unless some step to commence a rbitral proceedings is taken 
within a time fixed by the agreement, and a dispute  arises to which the agreement applies , the Court, if it 
is of opinion that in the circumstances of the case undue hardship would  otherwise be caused, and 
notwithstanding that the time so fixed has expired, may on such terms, if any, as the justice of the case  
may require, extend the time for such period as it thinks proper.  
(4) Where the Court orders that an arbitral award be set aside, the period between the commencement 
of the arbitration and the  date of the order of the Court shall be excluded in computing the time prescribed 
by the Lim itation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , for the  commencement of the proceedings (including 
arbitration) with respect to the dispute so submitted.  
 
STA TE AMENDMENT  
 Bihar. — 
Omission of sub -section (3) of Section -43 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.  - Sub 
Section -3 of the Section 43 of the said Act shall be omitted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 20 of 2002, s. 2]  
1[43J. Norms for accreditation of arbitrat ors.—The qualifications, experience and norms for 
accreditation of arbitrators shall be such as may be specified by the regulations.]  
 
PART II  
ENFORCE MENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS  
CHAPTER I  
New York Convention Awards  
44. Definition. —In this Chapter, unless  the context otherwise requires, “ foreign award”  means an 
arbitral award on differences  between persons arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or 
not, considered as commercial under the law in force in  India, made on or after the 11th day of October, 
1960 — 
(a) in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration to which the Convention set forth in 
the First Schedule applies, and  
(b) in one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions have bee n 
made may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be territories to which the said Convention applies.  
45. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration .—Notwithstanding anything contained in Part I 
or in the Code of Civil  Proce dure, 1908 (5 of 1908) ,a judicial authority, when seized of an action in a matter in 
respect of which the parties have made an  agreement referred to in section 44, shall, at the request of one of the 
parties or any person claiming through or under him, ref er the  parties to arbitration, 2[unless it prima facie  finds]  that 
the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.  
46. When foreign award binding. —Any foreign award which would be enforceable under this Chapter 
shall be tr eated as binding for  all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and may 
accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of  defence, set off or otherwise in any legal 
proceedings in India and any references in this Chapter to enforcing  a foreign award shall  be construed as 
including references to relying on an award.  
47. Evidence. —(1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time of the 
application, produce before the  court — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2021, s. 3, for section 43J (r.w.e.f. 23 -10-2021).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 11 , for “unless it finds” (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  27 
 (a) the original award or a cop y thereof, duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made;  
(b) the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified copy thereof; and  
(c) such evidence as may be n ecessary to prove that the award  is a foreign  award.  
(2) If the award or agreement to be produced under sub -section ( 1) is in a foreign language, the party 
seeking to enforce the award  shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by a diplomatic 
or consular agent of the country to wh ich that party  belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as 
may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.  
1[Explanation. —In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter, “Court” means the High 
Court having original juri sdiction to decide the questions forming the subject -matter of the arbitral award 
if the same had been the subject -matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the 
High Court  having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of  courts subordinate to such  High Court.]  
48. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards. —(1) Enforcement of a foreign award may be 
refused, at the request of the party  against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court 
proof th at— 
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in section 44 were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said  agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the  country where the award was 
made; or  
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment 
of the arbitrator or of the arbitral  proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or  
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on matters beyond the scope o f the submission to 
arbitration:  
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitrati on can be separated from those not 
so submitted, that part of the  award which contains decisions on matters submitted to arbitration may 
be enforced; or  
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or,  failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or  
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authorit y of the  country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made.  
(2) Enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the C ourt finds that — 
(a) the subject -matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the 
law of India; or  
(b) the enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of India.  
2[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award  is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if, — 
(i) the making of the aw ard was induced or affected by fraud or corruption  or was in violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or  
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or  
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.  
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a  contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on  the merits of the dispute. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 3 of 2016, s. 21, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Subs. by  s. 22,  ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).   28 
 (3) If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the awar d has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in clause  (e) of sub -section ( 1) the Court may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the 
decision on the enforc ement of the award and may also , on the application of the party claiming 
enforcement of the a ward, order the other party to give suitable security.  
49. Enforcement of foreign awards. —Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award  shall be deemed to be a decree of that Court.  
50. Appealable orders .—(1) 1[Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, an appeal]  shall l ie from the order refusing to — 
(a) refer the parties to arbitration under section 45;  
(b) enforce a foreign award under section 48,  
to the court author ised by law to hear appeals from such order.  
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away  any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.  
51. Saving .—Nothing in this Chapt er shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any award  or of availing himself in India of any award if this Chapter had not been 
enacted.  
52. Chapter II not to apply. —Chapter II of this Part shall not apply in rela tion to foreign awards to 
which this Chapter applies.  
CHAPTER II  
Geneva Convention Awards  
53. Interpretation. —In this Chapter “foreign award”  means an arbitral award on differences relating 
to matters considered as  commercial under the law in force in Indi a made afte r the 28th day of July,   
1924, — 
(a) in pursuance of an agreement for arbitration to which the Protocol set forth in the Second 
Schedule applies, and  
(b) between persons of whom one is subject to the jurisdiction of some one of such Powers as th e 
Central Government, being  satisfied that reciprocal provisions have been made, may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, declare to be parties to the  Convention set forth in the Third Schedule, and of 
whom the other is subject to the jurisdiction of some other of the Powers  aforesaid, and  
(c) in one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions 
have been made, may, by like  notification, declare to be territories to which the said Convention 
applies,  
and for the purposes of this Chapter an award shall not be deemed to be final if any proceedings for the 
purpose of contesting the  validity of the award are pending in the country in which it was made.  
54. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitratio n.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Part I or in the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908 (5 of 190 8), a judicial authority, on being 
seized of a dispute regarding a contract made between persons to whom  section 53 applies and including 
an arbitration agreem ent, whether referring to present or fu ture differences, which is valid under  that 
section and capable of being carried into effect, shall refer the parties on the application of either of them 
or any person  claiming through or under him to the decision of  the arbitrators and such reference shall not 
prejudice the competence of the judicial  authority in case the agreement or the arbitration cannot proceed 
or becomes inoperative.  
55. Foreign awards when binding .—Any foreign award which would be enforceable u nder this 
Chapter shall be treated as binding for  all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and 
may accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of  defence, set off or otherwise in any legal 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 12, for “An appeal” (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019) . 29 
 proceedings in India and any references  in this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall  be construed as 
including references to relying on an award.  
56. Evidence. —(1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at t he time of 
application produce  before the  Court — 
(a) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made;  
(b) evidence proving that the award has become final; and  
(c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the conditions mention ed in clauses ( a) and 
(c) of sub -section ( 1) of section  57 are satisfied.  
(2) Where any document requiring to be produced under sub -section ( 1) is in a foreign language, the 
party seeking to enforce the  award shall produce a translation into English certif ied as correct by a 
diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party  belongs or certified as correct in such 
other manner as may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.  
1[Explanation .—In this section and in the sections followi ng in this Chapter,  “Court” means the High 
Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions  forming the subject -matter of the arbitral award 
if the same had been the subject -matter  of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the 
High Court  having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such  High Court. ] 
57. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards .—(1) In order that a foreign award may be 
enforceable under this Chapter, it shall  be necessary t hat— 
(a) the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under the 
law applicable thereto;  
(b) the subject -matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of India;  
(c) the award has been made by  the arbitral tribunal provided for in the submission to arbitration 
or constituted in the manner  agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the law governing the 
arbitration procedure;  
(d) the award has become final in the country in which it has b een made, in the sense that it will 
not be considered as such if it is  open to opposition or appeal or if it is proved that any proceedings 
for the purpose of contesti ng the validity of the award are  pending;  
(e) the enforcement of the award is not contrar y to the public policy or the law of India.  
2[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award  is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if, — 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption  or was in violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or  
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law ; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.  
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as  to whether there is a  contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on  the merits of the dispute .] 
(2) Even if the conditions laid down in sub -section ( 1) are fulfilled, enforcement of the award shall be 
refused if the Court is satisfied  that— 
(a) the award has been annulled in the country in which it was made;  
(b) the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the 
arbitration proceedings in sufficient time to  enable him to present his case;  or that, being under a 
legal incapacity, he was not properly represented;  
                                                           
1. Sub s. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 23 , for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 24,  ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  30 
 (c) the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration or that it  contains decisions on matters beyond  the sco pe of the 
submission to arbitration:  
Provided that if the award has not covered all the differences submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit,  postpone such enforcement or grant it subject to such guarantee as the Court 
may decide . 
(3) If the party against whom the award has been made proves that under the law governing the 
arbitration procedure there is aground, other than the grounds referred to in clauses ( a) and ( c) of sub -
section ( 1) and clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 2)entitling him to contest the validity of the award, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse enforcement of the award or adjourn the  consideration thereof, 
giving such party a reasonable time within which to have the award annulled by the competent tr ibunal.  
58. Enforcement of foreign awards .—Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award  shall be deemed to be a decree of the Court.  
59. Appealable orders .—(1) An appeal shall  lie from the order refusing — 
(a) to refer the parties to arbitration under section 54;  and 
(b) to enforce a foreign award under section 57,  
to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order.  
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section , but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away  any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.  
60. Saving. —Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any award  or of availing himself in In dia of any award if this Chapter had not been 
enacted.  
PART III  
CONCILIATION  
61. Application and scope. —(1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force 
and unless the parties have  otherwise agreed, this Part shall apply to conciliatio n of disputes arising out of 
legal relationship, whether contractual or not and to  all proceedings relating thereto.  
(2) This Part shall not apply where by virtue of any law for the time being in force certain disputes 
may not be submitted to  conciliation.  
62. Commencement of conciliation proceedings. —(1) The party initiating conciliation shall send to 
the other party a written invitation  to conciliate under this Part, briefly identifying the subject of the 
dispute.  
(2) Conciliation proceedings , shall comme nce when the other party accepts in writing the invitation to 
conciliate.  
(3) If the other party rejects the invitation, there will be no conciliation proceedings.  
(4) If the party initiating conciliation does not receive a reply within thirty days from th e date on 
which he sends the invitation, or  within such other period of time as  specified in the invitation, he  may 
elect to treat this as a rejection of the invitation to conciliate  and if he so elects, he shall inform in writing 
the other party according ly. 
63. Number of conciliators. —(1) There shall be one conciliator unless the parties agree that there 
shall be two or three conciliators.  
(2) Where there is more than one conciliator, they ought, as a general rule, to act joint ly. 
 
64. Appointment of conc iliators. —(1) Subject to sub -section ( 2)— 
(a) in conciliation proceedings , with one conciliator, the parties may agree on the name of a sole 
conciliator;  31 
 (b) in conciliation proceedings with two conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator;  
(c) in conciliation proceedings with three conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator and 
the parties may agree on the  name of the third conciliator who shall act as the presiding conciliator.  
(2) Parties may enlist the assistance of a suitable institut ion or person in connection with the 
appointment of conciliators , and in  particular, — 
(a) a party may request such an institution or person to recommend the names of suitable 
individuals to act as conciliator; or  
(b) the parties may agree that the appointm ent of one or more conciliators be made directly by 
such a n institution or person:  
Provided that in recommending or appointing individuals to act as conciliator, the institution or 
person shall have regard to such  considerations as are likely to secure the  appointment of an independent 
and impartial conciliator and, with respect to a sole or third  conciliator, shall take into account the 
advisability of appointing a conciliator of a nationality other than the nationalities of the  parties.  
65. Submission  of statements to conciliator. —(1) The conciliator, upon his appointment, may 
request each party to submit to him a  brief written statement describing the general nature of the dispute 
and the points at issue.  Each  party shall send a copy of such statement to the other party.  
(2) The conciliator may request each party to submit to him a further written statement of his position 
and the facts and grounds in  support thereof, supplemented by any documents and other evidence that 
such party deems appropriate.  The p arty shall send a  copy of such statement, documents and other 
evidence to the other party.  
(3) At an y stage of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may request a party to submit to him 
such additional information as  he deems appropriate.  
Explanati on.—In this section and all the following sections of this Part, the term "conciliator" a pplies 
to a sole conciliator, two  or three  conciliators , as the case may be.  
66. Conciliator not bound by certain enactments. —The conciliator is not bound by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)or  the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
67. Role of conciliator. —(1) The conciliator shall assist the parties in an independent and impartial 
manner in their attempt to reach  an amicable settlement of their dispute . 
(2) The conciliator shall be guided by principles of objectivity, fairness and justice, giving 
consideration to, among other things, the  rights and obligations of the parties, the usages of the trade 
concerned and the circumstances surrounding the disput e, including  any previous business practices 
between the parties.  
(3) The conciliator may conduct the conciliation proceedings in such a manner as he considers 
appropriate, taking into account the  circumstances of the case, the wishes the parties may expre ss, 
including any request by a party that the conciliator hear oral  statements, and the need for a speedy 
settlement of the dispute.  
(4) The conciliator  may, at any stage of the conciliation proceedings, make proposals for a settlement 
of the dispute.  Such  proposals  need not be  in writing and need not be accompanied by a statement of the 
reasons therefor.  
68. Administrative assistance. —In order to facilitate the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the 
parties, or the conciliator with the  consent of the  parties, may arrange for administrative assistance by a 
suitable institution or person.  
69. Communication between conciliator and parties .—(1) The conciliator may invite the parties to 
meet him or may communicate with  them orally or in writing.  He may mee t or communicate with the 
parties together or with each of them separately.  
(2) Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where meetings with the conciliator are to be held, 
such place shall be  determined by the conciliator, after consultation with the  parties, having regard to the 
circumstances of the conciliation proceedings.  32 
 70. Disclosure of information. —When the conciliator receives factual information concerning the 
dispute from a party, he shall  disclose the substance of that information to the o ther party in order that the 
other party may have the opportunity to present any  explanation which he considers appropriate:  
Provided that when a party gives any information to the conciliator subject to a specific condition that 
it be kept confidential,  the conciliator shall not disclose that information to the other party.  
71. Co-operation of parties with conciliator. —The parties shall in good faith co -operate with the 
conciliator and, in particular, shall  endeavour to comply with requests by the concilia tor to submit written 
materials, provide evidence and attend meetings.  
72. Suggestions by parties for settlement of dispute .—Each party may, on his own initiative or at 
the invitation of the conciliator,  submit to the conciliator suggestions for the settle ment of the dispute.  
73. Settlement agreement. —(1) When it appears to the conciliator that there exist elements of a 
settlement which may be acceptable  to the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement 
and submit them to the parties for  their observations.  After  receiving the observations of the parties, the 
conciliator may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement in the light of such  observations.  
(2) If the parties reach agreement on a settlement of the dispute, they may draw up and sign a written 
settlement agreement.  If requested by the parties, the conciliator may draw up, or assist the parties in 
drawing up, the settlement agreement.  
(3) When the parties sign the settlement agreement, it shall be final and binding on the parti es and 
persons claiming under them  respectively.  
(4) The conciliator shall authenticate the settlement agreement and furnish a copy thereof to each of 
the parties.  
74. Status and effect of settlement agreement. —The settlement agreement shall have the  same 
status  and effect as if it is an arbitral award on  agreed terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by 
an arbitral tribunal under section 30.  
75. Confidentiality .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the con ciliator and the parties  shall keep confidential all matter s relating to the conciliation 
proceedings.  Confidentiality shall extend also to the settlement  agreement, except where its disclosure is 
necessary for purposes of implementation and enforcement.  
76. Termination of conciliation proceedings. —The conciliation proceedings shall be terminated — 
(a) by the signing of the sett lement agreement by the parties,  on the date of the agreement; or  
(b) by a written declaration of the conciliator, after c onsultatio n with the parties, to  the effect that 
further efforts at conciliation are no  longer justified, on the date of the declaration; or  
(c) by a written declaration of the parties addressed to the conciliator to the effect that the 
concilia tion proceedings are terminated , on the date of the declaration; or  
(d) by a written declaration of a party to the other party and the conciliator, if appointed, to the 
effect that the conciliation  proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration.  
77. Resort to arbit ral or judicial proceedings .—The parties shall not initiate, during the 
conciliation proceedings, any arbitral or judicial  proceedings in respect of a dispute that is the     subject -
matter of the conciliation proceedings except that a party may initiate a rbitral  or judicial proceedings  
where, in his opinion, such proceedings are necessary for preserving his rights.  
78. Costs. —(1) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall fix the cos ts of 
the conciliation and give  written  notic e thereof to the parties.  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), “costs”  means  reasonable costs relating to — 
(a) the fee and expenses of the conciliator and witness es requested by the conciliator  with the 
consent of the parties;  
(b) any expert advice requ ested by the conciliator with the consent of the parties;  
(c) any assistance provided pursuant to clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 64 and section 68.  33 
 (d) any other expenses incurred in connection with the conciliation proceedings and the 
settlement  agreement.  
(3) The costs shall be borne equally by the parties unless the settlement agreement prov ides for a 
different apportionment . All other  expenses incurred by a party shall be borne by that party.  
79. Deposits. —(1) The conciliator may direct each p arty to deposit an equal amount as an advance 
for the costs referred to in sub -section( 2) of section 78 which he expects will be incurred.  
(2) During the course of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may direct supplementary 
deposits in an equal amount from  each party.  
(3) If the required deposits under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) are not paid in full by both parties within 
thirty days, the conciliator may  suspend the proceedings or may make a written declaration of termination 
of the proceedings to the parties, effective on the date of  that declaration.  
(4) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings , the conciliator shall render an accounting to the 
parties of the deposits received  and shall return any  unexpended balance to the parties.  
80. Role of conciliator in other proceedings. —Unless othe rwise agreed by the parties ,— 
(a) the conciliator shall not act as an arbitrator or as a representative or counsel of a party in any 
arbitral or judicial proceeding in  respect of a dispute that is the subje ct of the conciliation 
proceedings;  
(b) the conciliator shall not be presented by the parties as a witness in any arbitral or judicial 
proceedings.  
81.Admissibility of  evidence in other proceedings. —The parties shall not rely on or introduce as 
evidence in  arbitral or judicial  proceedings, whether or not such proceedings relate to the dispute that is 
the subject o f the conciliation proceedings, — 
(a) views expressed or suggestions made by the other party in respect of a possible settlement of 
the dispute;  
(b) admissions made by the other party in the course of the conciliation proceedings;  
(c) proposals made by the conciliator;  
(d) the fact that the other party had indicated  his willingness  to accept a proposal for settlement 
made by the conciliator.  
PART IV  
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS  
82. Power of High Court to make rules. —The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act 
as to all proceedings before the  Court under this Act.  
83. Removal of difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the  provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by  order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be  necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall  made  be after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
Houses of Parliament.  
84. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the  provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after 
it is made before e ach House  of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sess ions aforesai d, both Houses agree in 34 
 making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the  rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any s uch modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
85. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Arbitration (Protocol and Co nvention) Act, 1937 (6 of 1937) , the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)  and th e Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement)                         
Act,1961 (45 of 1961) are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) the provisions of the said enactments shall apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which 
commenced be fore this Act came into  force unless otherwise agreed by the parties but this Act shall 
apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which commenced on or after  this Act comes into force;  
(b) all rules made and notifications published, under the said enactmen ts shall, to the extent to 
which they are not repugnant to this  Act, be deemed respectively to have been made or issued under 
this Act .  
86. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Third) Ordinance, 1996 (Ord.27 of 
1996) is  hereby repealed . 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any order, rule, notification or scheme made or anything done or  
any action taken in pursuance of any provision of the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been 
made,  done or taken under the corresponding provisions of  this Act.  
1[87. Effect of arbitral and related court proceedings commenced  prior to 23rd October, 
2015 .—Unless the parties otherwise agree, the amendments made to this Act by the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 shall — 
(a) not apply to — 
(i) arbitral proceedings commenced before the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015 (23rd October, 2015);  
(ii) court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such arbitral proceedings irrespective of 
whether such court proceedings are commenced prior to or after the commencement of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015;  
(b) apply only to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the commencement of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 and to court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such 
arbitral proceedings.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 13 ( r.w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 35 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 44)  
CONV ENTION ON THE RECOGNITION AND ENF ORCEMENT OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS  
ARTICLE 1  
1.This Convention shall apply to the reco gnition and enforcement of arbitral awards made in the 
territory of a State other than the  State where the recognition and enforcement of such awards are sought , 
and arising out of differences between persons, whether  physical or legal.  It shall also apply  to arbitral 
awards not considered as domestic awards in the State where their recognition and  enforcement are 
sought.  
2.The term “arbitral awards”  shall include not only awards made by arbitrators appointed for each 
case but also those made by  permanent a rbitral bodies to which the parties have submitted.  
3.When signing, ratifying or acceding to this Convention, or notifying exten sion under article X 
hereof, any  State may on the basis  of reciprocity declare that it will apply the Convention to the 
recognit ion and enforcement of awards made only in the territory of  another Contracting State.  It may 
also declare that it will apply the Convention only to differences arising out of legal relationships,  
whether contractual or not, which are cons idered as commerc ial under the national law of the State 
making such declaration.  
ARTICLE II  
1.Each Contracting State shall recognise an agreement in writing und er which the parties undertake  to 
submit to arbitration all or  any differences which have arisen or which may ar ise between them in respect 
of defined legal relationship, whether contractual or  not, concerning a subject -matter capable of 
settlement by arbitration.  
2.The term “agreement in writing”  shall include an arbitral clause in a contract or an arbitration 
agreement, signed by the parties or  contained in an exchange of letters or telegrams.  
3.The court of a Contracting State, when seized of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties 
have made an agreement  within the meaning of this article, shall, at the request of one of the parties, refer 
the parties to arbitration, unless in finds that the  said agreement is null and void, inoperative of incapable 
of being performed.  
ARTICLE III  
Each Contracting State shall recognize arbitral a wards as binding and en force  them in accordance 
with the rules of procedure  of the territory where the award is relied upon, under the conditions laid down 
in the following articles.  There shall not be imposed  substantially more onerous conditions or higher fees 
or charges on th e recognition or enforcement of arbitral awards to which this  Convention applies than are 
imposed on the recognition or enforcement of domestic arbitral awards.  
ARTICLE IV  
1.To obtain the recognition and enforce ment mentioned in the preceding  article, the party applying 
for recognition and  enforcement shall, at the time of the application, supply — 
(a) the duly authenticated original award o r a duly certified copy thereof;  
(b) the original agreement referred to in article II or a duly certified copy thereof.  
2.If the said award or agreement is not made in an official language of the country in which the award 
is relied upon, the party  applying for recognition and enforcement of the award shall produce a translation 
of these documents into such language.  The translation shall be certified by an official or sworn translator 
or by a diplomatic or consular agent.  
  36 
 ARTICLE V  
1.Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused, at the request of the party against whom 
it is invoked, only if that  party furnish es to the competent authority where the recognition and 
enfor cement is sought, proof that — 
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in article II were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said  agreement is  not valid under th e law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the  country where the award was 
made; or  
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment 
of the arbitrator or o f the arbitration  proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or  
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on matters beyond the scope o f the submission to 
arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters  submitted to arbitration can be separated from 
those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters  submitted to 
arbitration may be recognised and enf orced; or  
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or,  failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or  
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authority of the  country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made.  
2.Recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refus ed if the competent authority in 
the country where recognition  and enfo rcement is sought finds that — 
(a) the subject -matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of 
that country; or  
(b) the recognition or enforcement o f the award would be contrary to the public policy of that 
country.  
ARTICLE VI  
If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in article V(1)(e), the authority before which the award is  sought to be relied upon 
may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the decision on the  enforcement of the award and may also, on the 
application of the party claiming enforcement of the award, order the other party to  give suitable security.  
ARTICLE VII  
1.The provisions of the present Convention shall not affect the validity of multilateral or bilateral 
agreements concerning the  recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards entered into by the Contracting 
States nor deprive any interested party of any righ t the may have to avail himself of an arbitral award in 
the manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties of the country  where such award is sought 
to be relied upon.  
2.The Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses of 1923 and the Geneva Conventi on on the Execution 
of Foreign Arbitral Awards of1927 shall cease to have effect between Contracting States on their 
becoming bound and to the extent that they become bound by  this Convention.  
ARTICLE VIII  
1.This Convention shall be open  until 31st Decembe r, 1958 for signature on behalf of any Member of 
the United Nations and also  on behalf of any other State which is or hereafter becomes member of any 
specialised agency of the United Nations, or which is or  hereafter becomes a party to the Statute of the 
International Court of Justice, or any other State to which an invitation has been  addressed by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations.  
2.This Convention shall be ratified and the instrument of ratification shall be deposited with the 
Secretary -General of the United  Nations.  
ARTICLE 1X  
1.This Conv ention shall be open  for accession to all States referred to in article VIII.  
2.Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary -General 
of the United Nations.  37 
 ARTICLE X 
1.Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession, declare that this Convention shall 
extend to all or any of the  territories for the international relations of which it is responsible.  Such a 
declaration shall take effect when the Con vention enters  into force for the State concerned.  
2.At any time thereafter any such extension shall be made by notification addressed to the Secretary -
General of the United Nations  and shall take effect as from the ninetieth day after the day of receipt b y the 
Secretary -General of the United Nations of this  notification , or as from the date of entry into force of the 
Convention for the State concerned, whichever is the later.  
3.With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not extended at t he time of signature, 
ratification or accession, each  State concerned shall consider the possibility of taking the necessary steps 
in order to extend the application of this Convention to  such territories, subject, where necessary for 
constitutional reason s, to the consent of the Governments of such territories.  
ARTICLE XI  
In the case of a federal or non -unitary State, the foll owing provisions shall apply: — 
(a) with respect of those articles of this Convention that come within the legislative jurisdiction o f 
the federal authority, the  obligations of the federal Government shall to this extent be the same as 
those of Contracting States which are not federal States;  
(b) with respect to those articles of this Convention that come within the legislative jurisdic tion of 
constituent States or provinces  which are not, under the constitutional system of the federation, bound 
to take legislative action, the federal Government shall bring  such articles with a favourable 
recommendation to the notice of the appropriate a uthorities of constituent States or provinces at the  
earliest possible moment;  
(c) a federal State Party to this Convention shall, at the request of any other Contracting State 
transmitted through the Secretary -General of the United Nations, supply a state ment of the law and 
practice of the federation and its constituent units in regard to any  particular provision of this 
Convention, showing the extent to which effect has been given to that provision by legislative or 
other  action.  
ARTICLE XII  
1.This Conven tion shall come into force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the third 
instrument of ratification or  accession.  
2.For each State ratifying or acceding to this Convention after the deposit of the third instrument of 
ratification or acces sion, this  Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after deposit by such 
State of its instrument of ratification or accession.  
ARTICLE XIII  
1.Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by a written notification to the Secretary -
Gener al of the United  Nations.  Denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of receipt of the 
notification by the Secretary -General.  
2.Any State which has made a declaration or notification under article X may, at any time thereafter, 
by notification to the Secretary -General of the United Nations, declare that this Convention shall cease to 
extend to the territory concerned one year after the date  of the receipt of the notification by the Secretary -
General.  
3.This Convention shall continue to be applic able to arbitral awards in respect of which recognition or 
enforcement proceedings  have been instituted before the denunciation takes effect.  
ARTICLE XIV  
A Contracting State shall not be entitled to avail itself of the present Convention against other 
Cont racting States except to the  extent that it is itself bound to apply the Convention.  
  38 
 ARTICLE XV  
The Secretary -General of the United Nations shall notify the States contemplated in ar ticle VIII of the 
following: — 
(a) signatures and ratifications in accord ance with article VIII;  
(b) accessions in accordance with article IX;  
(c) declarations and notifications under articles I, X and XI;  
(d) the date upon which this Convention enters into force in accordance with article XII;  
(e) denunciations and notificatio ns in accordance with article XIII.  
ARTICLE XVI  
1.This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally 
authentic, shall be deposited  in the archives of the United Nations.  
2.The Secretary -General of the United Nations shall transmit a certified copy of this Convention to 
the State s contemplated in article  XIII.  
  39 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 53)  
PROTOCOL ON ARBITRATION CLAUSES  
The undersigned, being duly authorised, declare that they accept, on behalf of the  countries which 
they represent, the following  provisions: — 
1.Each of the Contracting States recognises the validity of an agreement whether relating to existing 
or future differences between  parties subject respectively to the jurisdiction of different Co ntracting States 
by which the parties to a contract agree to submit to  arbitration all or any differences that may arise in 
connection with such contract relating to commercial matters or to any other  matter capable of settlement 
by arbitration, whether or  not the arbitration is to take place in a country to whose jurisdiction none of  the 
parties is subject.  
Each Contracting State reserves the right to limit the obligation mentioned above to contracts which 
are considered as commercial  under its national la w .Any Contracting State which avails itself of this 
right will notify the Secretary -General of the League of Nations  in order that the other Contracting States 
may be so informed.  
2.The arbitral procedure, including the constitution of the Arbitral Tribun al, shall be governed by the 
will of the parties and by the law  of the country in whose territory the arbitration takes place.  
The Contracting States agree to facilitate all steps in the procedure which require to be taken in their 
own territories, in acco rdance  with the provisions of their law governing arbitral procedure applicable to 
existing differences.  
3.Each Contra cting State undertakes to ensure  the execution by its authorities and in accordance with 
the provisions of its national  laws of arbitral a wards made in its own territory under the preceding articles.  
4. The Tribunals of the Contracting Parties, on being seized of a dispute regarding a contract made 
between persons to whom  Article I applies and including an Arbitration Agreement whether refer ring to 
present or fu ture differences wh ich is valid in virtue of  the said article and capable of being carried into 
effect, shall refer the parties on the application of either of them to the decision of  the Arbitrators.  
Such reference shall not prejudice  the competence of the judicial tribunals in case the agreement or 
the arbitration cannot proceed  or becomes inoperative.  
5.The present Protocol, which shall remain open for signature by all States, shall be ratified.  The 
ratification shall be deposited as  soon as possible with the Secretary -General of the League of Nations, 
who shall notify such deposit to all the Signatory States.  
6.The present Protocol will come into force as soon as two ratifications have been deposited.  
Thereafter it will take effect, in the  case of each Contracting State, one month after the notification by the 
Secretary -General of the deposit of its ratification.  
7.The present Protocol may be denounced by any Contracting State on giving one year's notice.  
Denunciation shall be effecte d by a  notification addressed to the Secretary -General of the League, who 
will immediately transmit copies of such notification to all the  other Signatory States and inform them of 
the date on which it was received.  The denunciation shall take effect one y ear after the  date on which it 
was notified to the Secretary -General, and shall operate only in respect of the notifying State.  
8.The Contracting States may declare that their acceptance of the present Protocol does not include 
any or all of the  under  ment ioned territories:  that is to say, their colonies, overseas possessions or 
territories, protectorates or the territories over  which they exercise a mandate.  
The said States may subsequently adhere separately on behalf of any territory thus excluded.  The 
Secretary -General of the League  of Nations shall be informed as soon as possible of such adhesions.  He 
shall notify such adhesions to all Signatory States.  They will  take effect on e month after the notification 
by the Secretary -General to all Signatory States. 
The Contracting States may also denounce the Protocol separately on behalf of any of the territories 
referred to above.  Article 7applies to such denunciation.  40 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section  53) 
CONVENTION ON THE EXECUTION OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS  
ARTICLE  1.—(1) In the territories of any High Contracting Party to which the present Convention 
applies, an arbitral award made in pursuance of  an agreement whether relating to existing or future 
differences (hereinafter call ed “a submission to arbitration” ) covered by the  Protocol on A rbitration 
Clauses ope ned at Geneva on September 24th, 1923, shall be recognised as binding and shall be enforced  
in accordance with the rules of the procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon, provided that 
the s aid award has been  made in a territory of one of the High Contracting Parties to which the present 
Convention applies and between persons who are  subject to the jurisdiction of one of the High 
Contracting Parties.  
(2) To obtain such recognition or enforcem ent, it shall, further, be necessary: — 
(a) that the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under 
the law applicable thereto;  
(b) that the subject -matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of the 
country in which the award is  sought to be relied upon;  
(c) that the award has been made by the Arbitral Tribunal provided for in the submission to 
arbitration or constituted in the manner  agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the la w 
governing the arbitration procedure;  
(d) that the award has become final in the country in which it has been made, in the sense that it 
will not be considered as such if it  is open to opposition, appeal or pourvoi en cassation (in the 
countries where such  forms of procedure exist) or if it is proved that  any proceedings for the purpose 
of contesting the validity of the award are pending;  
(e) that the recognition or enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public policy or to the 
principles of the la w of the country in  which it is sought to be relied upon.  
ARTICLE 2 .—Even if the c onditions laid down in Article 1  hereof are fulfilled, recognition and 
enforcement of the award shall be refused if the  Court is satisfied: — 
(a) that the award has been annul led in the country in which it was made;  
(b) that the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the 
arbitration proceedings in sufficient time to  enable him to present his case; or that, being under a legal 
incapacity, he was  not properly represented;  
(c) that the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration or  that it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration.  
If the  award has not covered all the questions submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the competent 
authority of the country where  recognition or enforcement of the award is sought can, if it thinks fit , 
postpone such recognition or enforcement or grant it subject to such guarantee as that authority may 
decide.  
ARTICLE 3 .—If the party against whom the award has been made proves that, under the law 
governing the arbitration procedure, there is aground, other than the grounds referred to in Article 1( a) 
and ( c), and A rticle 2( b) and ( c), entitling him to contest the validity of the  award in a Court of Law, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse recognition or enforcement of the award or adjourn the  
consideration thereof, giving such party a reasonable time with in which to have the award annulled by the 
competent tribunal.  
  41 
 ARTICLE 4 .—The party relying upon an award or claiming its enforceme nt must supply, in 
particular: — 
(1) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated, according to the requirements of the 
law of the country in which it was  made;  
(2) documentary or other evidence to prove that the award has become final, in  the sense defined 
in Article 1 (d), in the country in  which it was made;  
(3) when necessary, documentary or other evidence to prov e that the cond itions laid down in 
Article 1, p aragraph ( 1) and  paragraph ( 2) (a) and ( c), have been fulfilled.  
A translation of the award and  of the other documents mentioned in this Article into the official 
language of the  country where the award is sou ght to be relied upon may be demanded.  Such translations 
must be certified correct by a diplomatic  or consular agent of the country to which the party who seeks to 
rely upon the award belongs or by a sworn translator of the country  where the award is sough t to be relied 
upon.  
ARTICLE 5 .—The provisions of the above A rticles s hall not deprive any interested party of the right 
of availing himself of an arbitral award in the  manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties 
of the country where such a ward is sought to be relied upon.  
ARTICLE 6 .—The present Convention applies only to arbitral awards made after the coming into 
force of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses  opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923.  
ARTICLE 7 .—The present Convention, which w ill remain open to the signature of all the signatories 
of the Protocol of 1923 on Arbitration  Clauses, shall have been ratified.  
It may be ratified only on behalf of those Members of the League of Nations and Non -Member States 
on whose behalf the Protocol  of 1923 shall have been ratified.  
Ratification shall be deposited as soon as possible with the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations, who will notify such  deposit to all the signatories.  
ARTICLE 8 .—The present Convention shall come into force three m onths after it shall have been 
ratified on behalf of two High Contracting  Parties.  Thereafter, it shall take effect, in the case of each High 
Contracting Party, three months after the deposit of the ratification  on its behalf with the Secretary -
General of the League of Nations.  
ARTICLE 9 .—The present Convention may be denounced on behalf of any Member of the League or 
Non-Member State.  Denunciation shall be  notified in writing to the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations, who will immediately send a copy thereof, certified to be  inconformity with the notifications, to 
all the other Contracting Parties, at the same time informing them of the date on which he  received it . 
The denunciation shall come into force only in respect of the High Contracting Party  which shall have 
notified it and one year after  such notification shall have reached the  Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations.  
The denunciation of the Protocol on A rbitration Clauses shall entail , ipso facto , the denunciation of 
the present Conventi on. 
ARTICLE 10 .—The present Convention does not apply to the colonies, protectorates or territories 
under suzerainty or mandate of any High  Contracting Party unless they are specially mentioned.  
The application of this Convention to one or more of such col onies, protectorates or territories to 
which the Protocol on Arbitration  Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923, applies, can be 
effected at any time by means of a declaration addressed to  the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations by one of the High Contracting Parties.  
Such declaration shall take effect three months after the deposit thereof.  
The High Contracting Parties can at any time denounce the Convention for all or any of the colonies, 
protectorates or territories  referred to above.  Article 9 hereof applied to such denunciation.  
ARTICLE 11 .—A certified copy of the present Convention shall be transmitted by the Secretary -
General of the L eague of Nations of every Member  of the League of Nations and to every Non -Member 
State which sign s the same.  42 
 1[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 11 (14)] 
 
 
Sum in dispute  Model fee  
 
Up to Rs. 5,00,000  Rs. 45,000  
 
Above Rs. 5,00,000 and up to Rs. 20,00,000  Rs. 45,000 plus 3.5 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 5,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 20,00,000 a nd up to Rs. 1,00,00,00 0 Rs. 97,500 plus 3 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 20,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 1,00,00,000 and up to  
Rs. 10,00,00,000  Rs. 3,37,500 plus 1 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 10,00,00, 000 and up to   
Rs. 20,00,00,000  Rs. 12,37,500 plus 0.75 per cent. of the claim  
amount over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 20,00,00,000  Rs. 19,87,500 plus 0. 5 per cent. of the claim 
amount over and above Rs. 20,00,00,000 with a 
ceiling of Rs. 30,00, 000 
 
Note: —In the event, the arbitral tribunal is a sole arbitrator, he shall be entitled to an additional amount of 
twenty -five per cent. on the fee payable as per the table set out above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 25 (w.e.f.  23-10-2015).  43 
  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12( 1)(b)] 
The f ollowing grounds give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or  impartiality of 
arbitrators:  
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel  
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present  business 
relationship with a party.  
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of  one of the parties.  
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one  of the parties.  
4. The arbitrator i s a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the  parties.  
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involve d in the matters in dispute in 
the arbitration.  
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case  without the 
arbitrator being involved himself or herself.  
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial  relationship with  one of the parties 
or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party even 
though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant finan cial income therefrom.  
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the case  of companies 
with the persons in the management and controlling the company.  
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant fina ncial interest in one of  the parties or 
an affiliate of one of the parties.  
11.The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the arbitration.  
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence in one of the parties.  
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the  outcome of the case.  
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party, and the  
arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.  
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute  
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute  to a party or an 
affiliate of one of the p arties.  
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.  
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute  
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an  affiliate of one 
of the parties that is pri vately held.  
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the  outcome of the 
dispute.  
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship  with a third party 
who may be liable to reco urse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the  dispute.  
  44 
 Previous services for one of the parties or other involvement in the case  
20. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel for one of the  parties or an affiliate 
of one of the  parties or has previously advised or been consulted by  the party or an affiliate of the party 
making the appointment in an unrelated matter, but the  arbitrator and the party or the affiliate of the party 
have no ongoing relationship.  
21. The arbitrator ha s within the past three years served as counsel against one of the  parties or an 
affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter.  
22. The arbitrator has within the past three years been appointed as arbitrator on two  or more 
occasions by one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
23. The arbitrator’s law firm has within the past three years acted for one of the parties  or an affiliate 
of one of the parties in an unrelated matter without the involvement of the arbitrator.  
24. The arbitr ator currently serves, or has served within the past three years, as arbitrator in another 
arbitration on a related issue involving one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
Relationship between an arbitrator and another arbitrator or couns el 
25. The arbitrator and another arbitrator are lawyers in the same law firm.  
26. The arbitrator was within the past three years a partner of, or otherwise affiliated  with, another 
arbitrator or any of the counsel in the same arbitration.  
27. A lawyer in the arbitrator’s law firm is an arbitrator in another dispute involving the  same party or 
parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
28. A close family member of the arbitrator is a partner or employee of the law firm  representing one 
of the parties, b ut is not assisting with the dispute.  
29. The arbitrator has within the past three years received more than three appointments  by the same 
counsel or the same law firm.  
Relationship between arbitrator and party and others involved in the arbitration  
30. Th e arbitrator’s law firm is currently acting adverse to one of the parties or an  affiliate of one of 
the parties.  
31. The arbitrator had been associated within the past three years with a party or an  affiliate of one of 
the parties in a professional capacit y, such as a former employee or  partner.  
Other circumstances  
32. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, which by reason of number  or 
denomination constitute a material holding in one of the parties or an affiliate of one of  the parties  that is 
publicly listed.  
33. The arbitrator holds a position in an arbitration institution with appointing authority  over the 
dispute.  
34. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affil iate of one of the parties, where the affiliate is not directly  involved in the matters in 
dispute in the arbitration.  
Explanation 1.—The term “close family member” refers to a spouse, sibling, child,  parent or life 
partner.  
Explanation 2.—The term “affili ate” encompasses all companies in one group of  companies including 
the parent company.  
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in  certain specific 
kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitrati on, to draw arbitrators  from a small, 
specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for  parties frequently to appoint the same 
arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to  be taken into account while applying the rules set out 
above.  45 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12 (1)(b)] 
NAME:  
CONTACT DETAILS:  
PRIOR EXPERIENCE (INCLUDING EXPERIENCE WITH ARBITRATIONS):  
NUMBER OF ONGOING ARBITRATIONS:  
CIRCUMSTANCES DISCLOSING ANY PAST OR PRESENT RELATIONSHIP WITH 
ORINTEREST IN ANY OF THE P ARTIES OR IN RELATION TO THE SUBJECT -MATTER 
INDISPUTE, WHETHER FINANCIAL, BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL OR OTHER KIND, WHICH IS 
LIKELY TO GIVE RISE TO JUSTIFIABLE DOUBTS AS TO YOURINDEPENDENCE OR 
IMPARTIALITY (LIST OUT):  
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH ARE LIKELY TO AFFECT YO UR ABILITY TO DEVOTE 
SUFFICIENT TIME TO THE ARBITRATION AND IN PARTICULAR YOUR ABILITY TO FINISH 
THE ENTIRE ARBITRATION WITHIN TWELVE MONTHS (LIST OUT):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12 (5)] 
Arbitrator’s relationship with the p arties or counsel  
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present  business 
relationship with a party.  
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of  one of the parties.  
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one  of the parties.  
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the  parties.  
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management , or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involved in  the matters in dispute in 
the arbitration.  
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case  without t he 
arbitrator being involved himself or herself.  
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with  one of the parties 
or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party even 
though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant financial  income therefrom.  
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the case  of companies 
with the perso ns in the management and controlling the company.  
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of  the parties or 
an affiliate of one of the parties.  
11. The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that i s a party in the arbitration.  
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence in one of the parties.  
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the  outcome of  the case.  
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party, and the 
arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.  
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute  
15. The arbi trator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute  to a party or an 
affiliate of one of the parties.  
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.  
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute  
17. The arbitrator  holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an  affiliate of one 
of the parties that is privately held.  
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the  outcome of the 
dispute.  
19. The arbitr ator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship  with a third party 
who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the  dispute.  
Explanation 1.—The term “close family member” refers to a spouse, sibling, child , parent or life 
partner.  
Explanation 2.—The term “affiliate” encompasses all companies in one group of  companies including 
the parent company.  
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in  certain specific 
kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw arbitrators  from a small, 
specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for  parties frequently to appoint the same 
arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fa ct to be taken into account while applying the rules set out 
above. ] 
 47 
 APPENDIX  
 EXTRACTS FROM THE ARBITRATION AND  CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT ) ACT, 2015  
(3 OF 2016)  
*   *   *   *   * 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Arbitration a nd Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come  into force on the 23rd October, 2015.  
*   *   *   *   * 
26. Act no t to apply to pending arbitral proceedings. —Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to 
the arbitral proceedings c ommenced, in accordance with the provisions of section 21 of the principal Act, 
before the commencement of this Act unless the parties otherwise agree but this Act shall apply in 
relation to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the date of commenceme nt of this Act.  
27. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance,                   
2015 (Ord. 9 of 2015), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act.  
 
The Consumer Protection Rules, 1987  
 
The principal rules were published in the Gazette of India vide number    GSR 398(E) dated 15th April, 
1987 and subsequently amended vide; 1. GSR 533(E) dated 14.8.1991, 2. GSR 800(E) dated 
30.12.1993, 3. GSR 522(E) dated 22.6.1994 , 4. GSR 605(E) dated 30.8.1995 , 5. GSR 759(E) dated 
21.11.1995,    6. GSR 95(E) dated 27.2.1997, 7. 88(E) dated 24.2.1998, 8. 175(E) dated 5.3.2004, 9. 
GSR 50 (E) dated 1.2.2005, 10. GSR 64 (E) dated 10.2.2005, 11.GSR 67 (E) dated 11.2.200 5, 12. GSR 
273 (E) dated 5.5.2006, 13. GSR 462 (E) dated 4.8.2006 and 14. GSR 637(E) dated 13.10.2006.  
  
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION RULES 1987  
(Amended up to 13.10.2006)  
  
In exercise   of the powers conferred by sub -section (1) of section 30 of t he Consumer Protection Act , 
1986 (68 of l986), Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:  
  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. -- (1) These rules may be called the Consumer Protection 
Rules,1987.  
  
(2) They shall come into forc e on the date of their publication in the Official  Gazette.  
  
2. Definitions. -ln these rules, unless the context otherwise requires -- 
(a)   'Act' means the Consumer Protection Act l986 (68 of 1986);  
(b)   'agent' means a person duly authorised by a party to present any complaint,     
       appeal or reply on its behalf before the National Commission;  
(c)   'appellant' means a party which makes an appeal against the order of the State  
       Commission;  
(d)   'chairman' means a chairman of the Central Consu mer Protection Council  
        established under sub -section (1 ) of the section 4 of the Act;  
(e)   'memorandum' means any memorandum of appeal filed by the appellant;  
(f)    'opposite party' means a person who answers complaint or claim;  
(g)   'president ' means the President of the National Commission;  
(h)   'respondent' means the person who answers any memorandum of appeal;  
(i)    'section' means section of the Act;  
(j)    'state' includes Union territories also;  
(k)    words and expressions used in the rules and not defined but defined in the Act  
        shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.  
  
2A. State Governments to recognise a laboratory as an appropriate L aboratory. -( 1 ) For the purpose of 
obtaining recognition as an app ropriate laboratory, the applicant shall send application, in triplicate, in 
the proforma prescribed by the Bureau of Indian Standards with the relevant details to the Department 
concerned with the consumer protection work in the State Governmen  t. 
  
    (2) The State Government on receiving the application from the applicant, shall forward its two copies 
to the Bureau of Indian Standards to assess the suitability of the laboratory from the standards 
prescribed by them (Bureau of Indian Standards). The fee c harged by the Bureau of Indian Standards, 
for this purpose, shall be paid by the applicant.  
  
    (3) The State Government on receiving the recommendations and approval of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards, shall notify that laboratory as an 'appropriate labo ratory' for the purpose of Consumer 
Protection Act ,1986 for a period of three years.  
  
3. The Constitution of the Central Consumer Protection Council and the Working Groups - (1) The 
Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette consti tute the Central Consumer 
Protection Council (herein after referred to as the Central   Council) which shall consist of the following 
members, not exceeding 35, namely: — 
(a)   the Minister in -charge of Consumer Affairs in the Central Government who shall be  the Chairman of 
the Central Council;  
  
(b)   the Minister of State (where he is not holding independent charge) or Deputy Minister in charge of 
Consumer Affairs in the Central Government who shall be the Vice -Chairman of the Central Council;  
  
(c) the Min ister in -charge of Consumer Affairs of two of the States from each region as mentioned in 
Schedule I to be changed by rotation on expiration of the term of the Council on each occasion;  
(ca) an administrator (whether designated as administrator or Lieutena nt Governor), of a Union 
Territory, to represent a Union Territory, as mentioned in Schedule II, to be changed by rotation on 
expiration of the term of the Council on each occasion;    
(d)   two Members of Parliament —one from the Lok Sabha and one from the Rajya Sabha;  
  
(e)   deleted;  
  
(f)     representatives of the Central Government Departments and autonomous organisations concerned 
with consumer interests —not exceeding five;  
  
(fa) The Registrar, National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delh i 
  
(g) representatives of consumer organisations from amongst the Indian members of the International 
Organization, namely, Consumer International – not exceeding six, to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(ga) representatives with proven expertise a nd experience who are capable of representing consumer 
interests, drawn from amongst consumer organisations, consumer activists, women, farmers, trade and 
industry – not exceeding five, one from each of the regions specified in schedule annexed to these ru les; 
(h)   deleted;  
  
(i)    deleted;  
  
(j)    the Secretaries in -charge of Consumer Affairs in the States to be nominated by the Central 
Government – not exceeding three;  
  
(k)  the Secretary in -charge of Consumer Affairs in the Central Government shall b e the member -
secretary of the Central Council.  
  
    (2) The term of the Council shall be three years.  
  
    (3) Any member may, by writing under his hand to the Chairman of the Central Council, resign from 
the Council. The vacancies, so caused or otherwis e, shall be filled from the same category by the Central 
Government and such person shall hold office so long as the member whose place he fills would have 
been entitled to hold office, if the vacancy had not occurred.  
  
    (4) deleted.  
  
4. Procedure of the Central Council. —Under sub -section (2) of section 5, the Central Council shall 
observe the following procedure in regard to the transaction of its business, — 
  
    (1) The meeting of the Central Council shall be presided over by the Chairman. In the ab sence of the 
Chairman, the Vice -Chairman shall preside over the meeting of the Central Council. In the absence of 
the Chairman and the Vice -Chairman, the Central Council shall elect a member to preside over that 
meeting of the Council.  
  
    (2) Each meeti ng of the Central Council shall be called by giving, not less than ten days from the date 
of issue, notice in writing to every member.  
  
    (3) Every notice of a meeting of the Central Council shall specify the place and the day  
 
   
and hour of the meetin g and shall contain statement of business to be transacted thereat.  
  
    (4) No proceedings of the Central Council shall be invalid merely by reasons of existence of any 
vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the Council.  
  
    (5) For the purpos e of performing its functions under the Act, the Central Council may constitute from 
amongst its members, such working groups as it may deem necessary and every working group so 
constituted shall perform such functions as are assigned to it by the Central Council. The findings of such 
working groups shall be placed before the Central Council for its consideration.  
  
    (6) In connection with the journey undertaken to and fro by the non -official members for attending 
the meeting of the Central Consumer Prot ection Council or its working group, they shall be entitled to 
avail first class or two -tier air - conditioned class of railway accommodation by all trains (including 
Rajdhani   Express) and claim such fare or cost of actual mode of travel, whichever is less .  The non -
official members from Island territories shall be entitled to, to and fro air journey (economy class) in 
domestic airlines from the Islands to the nearest main -land airport and thereafter rail fare by entitled 
class. The non -official members who  are senior citizens shall be entitled to, to and fro air -journey 
(economy class) in domestic airlines on availing senior citizen concessional air fare for their journeys provided the distance being travelled is 1000 kms or above. The non -official members shall be entitled 
to a sum of Rs.1000 per each day of the meeting as incidental charges to cover the expenditure towards 
their daily allowance, lodging, local conveyance from residence to the station/airport and from 
station/airport to the venue of meeting  and vice -versa. Every claim made under this sub -rule shall be 
subject to certifying that the member will not claim any benefit from any other Central Government 
Ministry, Department or Organization during his visit for attending the meeting of the Central  Consumer 
Protection Council or any of its Working Group. Local non -official members residing at the place of the 
venue of the meeting, shall be paid consolidated conveyance and hire charges to the tune of Rs. 200 per 
diem irrespective of the classificatio n of the city. Members of Parliament attending meetings of the 
Council or its Working Group shall be entitled to travelling and daily allowances at such rates as are 
admissible to such members'.  
  
    (7) The resolution passed by the Central Council shall  be recommendatory in nature.  
  
5. Place of the National Commission. —The office of the National Commission shall be located in the 
Union Territory of Delhi.  
  
6. Working days and office hours of the National Commission. —The working days and office hours of  the 
National Commission shall be the same as that of the Central Government.  
  
7. Seal and emblem. —The official seal and emblem of the National Commission shall be such as the 
Central Government may specify.  
  
8. Sitting of the National Commission. —The si tting of the National Commission as and when necessary, 
shall be convened by the President.  
  
9. Staff of the National Commission. —The Central Government shall appoint such staff as may be 
necessary to assist the National Commission in its day to day work and to perform such other functions 
as are provided under the Act and these rules or assigned to it by the President. The salary payable to 
such staff shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
  
  
9A. Fee for making complaints before Distric t Forum - (1) Every complaint filed under sub -section (1) of 
section 12, sub -section (1) of section 17 and clause (a) in sub -clause (1) of section 21 of the Act shall 
be accompanied by a fee, as specified in the table given below in the form of crossed Dem and Draft 
drawn on a nationalised bank or through a crossed Indian Postal Order in favour of the President of the 
District Forum, Registrar of the State Commission or the Registrar of the National Commission, as the 
case may be, and payable at the respecti ve place where the District Forum, State Commission or the 
National Commission is situated.  
(2) The concerned authority referred to in sub -rule (1) shall credit the amount of fee received by it into 
the Consumer Welfare Fund of the respective State and wh ere such Fund is not established, into the 
Receipt Account of the State Government and in the case of the National Commission, to the Consumer 
Welfare Fund of the Central Government.  
 TABLE  
  
Sl. No.  Value of goods or services and the compensation claimed  Amount of fee payable  
(1) (2) (3) 
  District Forum    
(1) Upto one lakh Rupees - For complainants who are under the 
Below Poverty Line holding Antyodaya Anna Yojana cards.  Nil 
(2) Upto one lakh Rupees - For complainants other than 
Antyodaya Anna Yojana card holders.  Rs.100  
(3) One lakh rupees and above but less than five lakh rupees  Rs.200  
(4) Five lakh rupees and above but less than Rs.10 lakh  Rs.400  
(5) Ten lakh rupees and above but not exceeding twenty lakh 
rupees  Rs.500  
  State Commission    
(6) Above twenty lakh and upto fifty lakh Rupees  Rs.2000  
(7) Above fifty lakh and upto one crore Rupees  Rs.4000  
  National Commission    
(8) Above one crore Rupees  Rs.5000  
(3) The complainant who are under the Below Poverty Line shall be entitled for exe mption of payment of 
fee only on production of an attested copy of the Antyodaya Anna Yojana cards.    
10. Additional powers of the National Commission, State Commission and District Forum. -- (1 ) The 
National Commission, the State Commission and the Distr ict Forum shall have power to require any 
person, — 
(a)  to produce before, and allow to be examined and kept by an officer of the National Commission, the 
State Commission or the District Forum, as the case may be, specified in this behalf, such books, 
accounts, documents or commodities in the custody or under the control of the person so required as 
may be specified or described in the requisition, if the examination of such books, accounts, documents 
or commodities are required for the purpose of this Act ; 
(b) to furnish to an officer so specified, such information as may be required for the purpose of this Act.  
  
    (2)(a) Where during any proceedings under this Act, the National Commission, the State Commission 
or the District Forum, as the case may be,  has any ground to believe that any book, paper, commodity 
or document which may be required to be produced in such proceedings, are being or may be, 
destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, it may, by written order, authorise any officer to 
exercise the power of entry and search of any premises. Such authorised officer may also seize such 
books, papers, documents or commodities as are required for the purpose of this Act:  
  
            Provided that such seizure shall be communicated to the Na tional Commission, the State 
Commission or the District Forum, as the case may be, as soon as it is made or within a period not 
exceeding 72 hours of making such seizure after specifying the reasons in writing for making such 
seizure.  
  
    (b) The Nationa l Commission, the State Commission or the District Forum, as the case may be, on 
examination of such seized documents or commodities, as the case may be, may order the retention 
thereof or may return it to the party concerned.  
  
10A. Credit of the fine int o the Consumer Welfare Fund when consumers are not identified conveniently - 
(1) Where an order is passed by the National Commission in exercise of the powers vested under clause 
(hb) of sub -section (1) of section 14 directing the opposite party to pay such  amount as determined by 
it on account of loss or injury suffered due to defects in goods complained gains or alleged deficiency of 
service to a large number of consumers, who are not identifiable conveniently, such sum shall be 
credited by the National Co mmission in the Consumer Welfare Fund established by the Central 
Government under section 12 (C) of the Central Excise Act, '1944 (1 of 1944).  
  
(2) Any amount credited to the said Fund shall be utilized in accordance with the provisions of the 
Consumer W elfare Fund Rules, 1992.  
  
10B Number of Members in the National Commission: - The National Commission shall consist of not 
less than four members and not more than nine members and at least one of them shall be a woman.  
  
 11. Salaries, honorarium and o ther allowances of the President and Members of the National 
Commission. —(1) The President of the National Commission shall be entitled to salary, allowances and 
other perquisites as are available to a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court.  
(1A) The other mem bers of the National Commission appointed on whole -time basis shall be entitled to 
the following honorarium and other allowances with effect from the 1st day of April, 2006, namely: - 
(a) the members shall be paid twenty -three thousand rupees per month by w ay of honorarium: Provided 
that the members, who are retired Judges of High Courts or retired Secretaries to the Government of 
India shall have the option to either receive consolidated honorarium of twenty -three thousand rupees 
per month or receive remune ration of last pay drawn less pension;  
(b) a woman who has not held an office of profit earlier, on appointment as a member shall be entitled 
to a pay in the scale of Rs. 24050 -26000 per month along with other benefits;  
(c) the members shall be provided w ith Government accommodation or receive house rent allowance of 
eight thousand rupees per month in lieu thereof;  
(d) the members shall be paid conveyance allowance at the rate of ten thousand rupees per month, if no 
chauffeur driven government vehicle is p rovided in which event one hundred fifty litres of petrol shall be 
supplied or the price therefor shall be paid;  
(e) the members shall be entitled to one thousand free calls for the telephone installed at their 
residence, with STD and ISD facilities; and  
(f) the members shall be entitled to fifteen days casual leave in a year.  
    (2) The members shall be entitled to travelling and daily allowances on official tours at the same rates 
as are admissible to group 'A' Officers of the Central Government.  
  
    (3) The honorarium or the salary, as the case may be, and other allowances shall be defrayed out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India.  
  
12. Terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the National Commission. --(1) Before appointment, the P resident and a member of the National Commission shall have to take an 
undertaking that he does not and will not have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as such member.  
  
(2) Deleted.  
     
(3) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -rule (2) the President or a member may. — 
(a) by writing under his hand and addressed to the Central Government resign his office at any time but 
his office shall become vacant only when such resignation is accepted by the Ce ntral Government,  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of rule 13.  
  
    (4) The terms and conditions of service of the President and the members shall not be varied to their 
disadvantage during their tenure of office.  
  
    (5) A casual vacancy caused by resignation or removal of the President or any other member of the 
National Commission under sub -rule (3) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh appointment.  
  
    (6) when the office of the President of the National Commission i s vacant or a person occupying such 
office is by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the same shall, 
save as otherwise provided in the proviso to section 22D be performed by the senior most member of 
the National Com mission.  
  
    (7) The President or any member ceasing to hold office as such shall not hold any appointment in or 
be connected with the management or administrations of an organisation which have been the subject 
of any proceeding under the Act during his  tenure for a period of 5 years from the date on which he 
ceases to hold such office.  
12A. Procedure for selection of Members  – (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -rule (2), the process of 
appointment of a Member shall be initiated at least three months before the vacancy arises.  
(2) If a post falls vacant due to resignation or death of a Member or creation of a new post, the process 
for filling the post shall be initiated immediately after the post has fallen vacant or is created, as the 
case may be.  
(3) An advertisement of a vacancy inviting applications from eligible candidates may be published in 
leading newspapers in India or by vacancy circulars or both, as may be decided by the Central 
Government.  
(4) After scrutiny of the applications received til l the last date specified for receipt of applications, a list 
of eligible candidates alongwith their applications shall be placed before the Selection Committee 
constituted under the third proviso to Sub -section (1) of Section 20.  
(5) The Selection Committ ee shall consider all the applications of eligible applicants referred to it.  
(6) The Selection Committee shall, subject to the provisions of sub -rule (6A), assess the suitability of 
the candidates for the post of Member:  
Provided that the Selection Commit tee may, if it considers necessary, depending on the number of 
candidates, short list them on the basis of comparative merit and experience of such candidates for 
selection.  
(6A) The Selection Committee shall assess the suitability of the candidates and wh ere short listing is 
done, from among the short -listed candidates, for the post of Member in the following manner, namely: - 
(a) in the case of candidates having judicial background, by assessing them on the basis of the 
judgements and other judicial orders  passed by such candidates;  
(b) in the case of candidates having experience of working under the Central Government or any State 
Government or an undertaking under the Central Government or a State Government, by assessing such 
candidates on the basis of t heir Annual Confidential Reports and their experience relevant to the post 
applied for;  
(c) in other cases, the suitability of the short listed candidates shall be assessed by the Selection 
Committee on the basis of personal interview conducted by it:  
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this sub -rule, the Selection Committee may, for 
assessing the suitability of a class or category of candidates, if it considers necessary, call such class or 
category of candidates for interview for assessing  their suitability for the post of Member.  
(7) The Selection Committee may, on the basis of its assessment made by it, recommend a panel of 
names of candidates for appointment as Members from amongst the applicants referred to in sub -rule 
(5) in order of m erit for the consideration of the Central Government.  
(8) The Central Government shall, before seeking approval of the Appointments Committee of the 
Cabinet, verify or cause to be verified the credentials and antecedents of the candidates selected by the 
Central Government from the panel recommended by the Selection Committee and satisfy the suitability 
of such candidates for appointment as Members.  
(9) Every appointment of a Member shall be subject to his medical fitness.  
13. Removal of President or member s from office in certain circumstances. -- (1) The Central 
Government may remove from office, the President or any member, who, — 
(a)   has been adjudged as an insolvent; or  (b)   has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Governme nt, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c)   has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the President or the member; or  
(d)   has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the 
President or a mem ber; or  
(e)   has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest ;or  
(f)     remain absent in three consecutive sittings except for reasons beyond his control.  
  
    (2) Notwithstanding anything contained i n sub rule (1), the President or any member of the National 
Commission shall not be removed from his office  except by an order made by the Central Government 
on the grounds specified in clauses (d), (e) and (f) of that sub -rule and after an inquiry held by  a sitting 
Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India in which the President or member of 
the National Commission, as the case may be, has been informed of the charges against him and given 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in  respect of those charges and found guilty.  
  
14. Procedure to be followed by the National Commission. —(1) A complaint containing the following 
particulars shall be presented by the complainant in person or by his agent to the National Commission 
or  be se nt by registered post, addressed to the National Commission:  
(a)   the name, description and the address of the complainant;  
(b)   the name, description and address of the opposite party or parties, as the case may be, so far as 
they can be ascertained;  
(c)   the facts relating to the complaint and when and where it arose;  
(d)   documents in support of the allegations contained in the complaint;  
(e)   the relief which the complainant claims.  
  
    (1A) Every complaint under sub -rule (1) shall be accompanied  by the relevant fee as is specified in 
rule 9A.  
  
    (2) The National Commission shall, in disposal of any complaint before it, as far as possible, follow 
the procedure and conditions including the provisions governing adjournments as laid down in secti ons 
12 and 13 in relation to the complaints received by the District Forum, with such modification as may be 
considered necessary by the Commission.  
  
    (3) On the date of hearing or any other date to which hearing could be adjourned, it shall be 
obligat ory on the parties or their agents to appear before the National Commission. Where the 
complainant or his agent fails to appear before the National Commission on such days, the National 
Commission may in its discretion either dismiss the complaint for defa ult or decide it on merits . Where 
the opposite party or its agent fails to appear on the date of hearing the National Commission may 
decide the complaint ex -parte.  
  
    (4) The National Commission may, on such terms as it deems fit and at any stage of th e proceedings, 
adjourn the hearing of the complaint but the complaint shall be decided as far as possible within a period 
of three months from the date of notice received by opposite party where complaint does not require 
analysis or testing of commodities  and within five months if it requires analysis or testing of 
commodities.  
  
     (4A) In the event of a complaint being disposed of after the period specified in sub -rule (4), the 
National Commission shall record in writing, the reasons for the delay in s uch disposal.  
  
    (5) If after the proceedings conducted under sub -rule (3), the National Commission is satisfied with 
the allegations contained in the complaint, it shall issue orders to the opposite party or parties, as the 
case may be, directing him o r them to take one or more of the things as mentioned in sub -section ( 1 ) 
of section 14. The National Commission shall also have the power to direct that any order passed by it, 
where no appeal has been preferred under section 2 or where the order of the National Commission has 
been affirmed by the Supreme Court under that section, be published in the Official Gazette or through 
any other media and no legal proceedings shall lie against the National Commission or any media for 
such publication.  
  
14A. Appe als before National Commission. - Every appeal filed in   terms of section 19 shall be 
accompanied by such amount as specified in the second proviso to the said section and such amount 
may be remitted in the form   of a crossed Demand Draft drawn on a nationa lized bank in favour of the 
Registrar, National Commission, payable at Delhi. The National Commission dealing with the appeals 
filed before them shall follow the provisions of section    19 and 19A as may be required to hear the 
appeals filed before the Com mission.  
  
Explanation. - In this rule, 'nationalized bank' means a corresponding new bank specified in the First 
Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or a corresponding new bank specified in th e First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
  Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980).  
  
15. Procedure for hearing the appeal. -- ( 1 ) Memorandum shall be presented by the appellant or his 
agent to the National Commission in person  or be sent by registered post addressed to the Commission.  
  
    (2) Every memorandum filed under sub -rule (I) shall be in legible handwriting preferably typed and 
shall set forth concisely under distinct heads, the grounds of appeal without any argument or narrative 
and such grounds shall be numbered consecutively.  
  
    (3) Each memorandum shall be accompanied by a crossed demand draft as referred to in rule 14A   
and by a certified copy of the order of the State Commission appealed against and such of th e 
documents as may be required to support grounds of objection mentioned in the memorandum.  
  
    (4) When the appeal is presented after the expiry of the period of limitation as specified in the Act, 
the memorandum shall be accompanied by an application s upported by an affidavit setting forth the 
facts on which the appellant relies to satisfy the National Commission that he has sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within the period of limitation.  
  
    (5) The appellant shall submit four copies o r such number of copies of the memorandum to the 
Commission for official purpose.  
    
    (6) On the date of hearing or on any other day to which hearing may be adjourned, it shall be 
obligatory for the parties or their agents to appear before the National  Commission . If appellant or his 
agent fails to appear on such date, the National Commission may in its discretion either dismiss the 
appeal or decide ex -parte on merits. If the respondent or his agent fails to appear on such date, the 
National Commission  shall proceed ex -parte and shall decide the appeal on merits of the case.  
  
(7) The appellant shall not, except by leave of the National Commission, urge or be heard in support of 
any ground of objection not set forth in the memorandum but the National Co mmission, in deciding the 
appeal, may not confine to the grounds of objection set forth in the memorandum:  
  
            Provided that the Commission shall not rest its decision on any other ground other than those 
specified in the memorandum unless the pa rty who may be affected thereby, has been given, an 
opportunity of being heard by the National Commission.  
  
    (8) No adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the National Commission, unless sufficient cause is 
shown and the reasons for grant of adjour nment have been recorded in writing by the Commission. The 
National Commission may also adjourn the hearing of the appeal suo motu, on such terms as it may 
think fit and at any stage of the proceedings for reasons to be recorded in writing. The appeal shal l be 
decided, as far as possible, within ninety days from the date of its admission. In the event of an appeal 
being disposed of after the period so specified, the National Commission shall record in writing the 
reasons of the same at the time of disposal of the said appeal.  
  
    (9) The order of the National Commission shall be communicated to the parties concerned free of 
cost. 
  
15A. Sitting of the National Commission and signing of orders. --  (1) Every proceeding of the National 
Commission shall be co nducted by the President or the senior most member and at least two members 
thereof sitting together except when a bench is constituted by the President of the National Commission 
with one or more members as he may deem fit:  
  
          Provided that one m ember or members for any reason are unable to conduct proceedings till it is 
completed, the President or the senior most member, as provided in section 22D of the Act, shall 
conduct such proceedings from the stage at which it was last heard by the previous  member.  
  
    (2) Every order made by the National Commission shall be signed by the President or the senior most 
member as provided under section 22D and at least two members who conducted the proceeding and if 
there is any difference of opinion among th emselves, the opinion of majority shall be the order of the 
National Commission:  
  
            Provided that where the proceeding is conducted by the President or the senior most member as 
provided under section 22D and three members thereof and they diffe r on any point or points, they shall 
state the point or points on which they differ and refer the same to the other member for hearing on 
such point or points and such point or points shall be decided accordingly to the opinion of the majority 
of the Natio nal Commission.  
  16. Manner of deposit of amount in appeals before Supreme Court - Every appeal filed before the 
Supreme Court in terms of section 23 shall be accompanied by an amount as provided in the second 
proviso to that section and   such amount may be remitted in the form of a crossed Demand Draft drawn 
on a  nationalized bank in favour of Registrar, Supreme Court, payable at Delhi.  
   
Explanation. - In this rule, 'nationalized bank' means a corresponding new bank specified in the First 
Schedule to t he Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or 
a corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and   
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980)  
  
SCHEDULE I  
[See rule 3 (1) (c)]  
  
1. Eastern Region - to consist of the States of Bihar, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, and West Bengal.  
2. Western Region - to consist of the States of Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan.  
3. Northern Region - to cons ist of the States of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, 
Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal.  
4. Southern Region - to consist of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu.  
5. North Eastern Region – to consist of the States o f Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim.  
SCHEDULE II  
[See rule 3 (1) (ca)]  
The Union Territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman 
and Diu, Lakshadweep, Pondicherry a nd the National Capital Territory of Delhi.  
 
1 
 THE HINDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP ACT, 1956 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
____________ 
SECTIONS  
1.  Short title and extent.  
2.  Act to be supplemental to Act 8 of 1890.  
3.  Application of Act.  
4.  Definitions.  
5.  Over-riding effect of Act.  
6.  Natural guardians of a Hindu minor.  
7.  Natural guardianship of adopted son.  
8.  Powers of natural guardian.  
9.  Testamentary guardians and their powers.  
10.  Incapacity of minor to act as guardian of property.  
11.  De facto  guardian not to deal with minor’s property.  
12.  Guardian not to be appointed for minors undivided i nterest in joint family property.  
13.  Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration.  
  2 
 THE HINDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP ACT, 1956 
ACT NO. 32 OF  1956 
[25 th August , 1956.] 
An Act to amend and codify certain parts of the law  relating to minority and guardianship among 
Hindus. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Minority and Gua rdianship Act, 
1956. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1*** and applies also to Hindus domiciled in the ter ritories to 
which this Act extends who are outside the said ter ritories. 
2. Act to be supplemental to Act 8 of 1890. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to , and 
not, save as hereinafter expressly provided, in der ogation of, the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890               
(8 of 1890). 
3. Application of Act. —(1) This Act applies,— 
(a) to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any o f its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo,  Prarthana or Arya Samaj; 
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion, and 
(c) to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion unless it is pr oved that any such person would not have been 
governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage  as part of that law in respect of any of the 
matters dealt with herein if this Act had not been passed. 
Explanation .—The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jain s, or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be:— 
(i) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of wh ose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains or 
Sikhs by religion; 
(ii ) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of who se parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jain or 
Sikh by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to 
which such parent belongs or belonged; and 
(iii ) any person who is convert or re-convert to the Hi ndu, Buddhist, Jain or Sikh religion. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1) nothing contained in this Act shall apply to 
the members of any scheduled Tribe within the meani ng of clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitutio n 
unless the Central Government, by notification in t he Official Gazette, otherwise directs.  
2[(2A ) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), nothing contained in this Act shall 
apply to the Renoncants of the Union Territory of P ondicherry.] 
(3) The expression “Hindu”, in any provision of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, neverthele ss, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions contained in this section. 
 4. Definitions. —In this Act,— 
(a) “minor” means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years; 
(b) “guardian” means a person having the care of the person of a minor or of his property or of 
both his person and property, and includes— 
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Sc hedule (w.e.f. 31-10- 
2019). 
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3( 1) and the Schedule (w.e.f. 24-5-1968). 3 
 (i) a natural guardian, 
(ii ) a guardian appointed by the will of the minor’s f ather or mother, 
(iii ) a guardian appointed or declared by a court, and 
(iv ) a person empowered to act as such by or under any  enactment relating to any Court of 
wards. 
(c) “natural guardian” means any of the guardians men tioned in section 6. 
5. Over-riding effect of Act. —Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,—   
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or usage as part of that law in 
force immediately before the commencement of this A ct Shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which provision is made in this Act. 
(b) any other law in force immediately before the com mencement of this Act shall cease to have 
effect in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act. 
6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor. —The natural guardians of a Hindu minor; in respect  of the 
minor's person as well as in respect of the minor’s  property (excluding his or her undivided interest in 
joint family property), are— 
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl—the fat her, and after him, the mother: provided that 
the custody of a minor who has not completed the ag e of five years shall ordinarily be with the 
mother; 
(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegiti mate unmarried girl—the mother, and after her, 
the father; 
(c) in the case of a married girl—the husband: 
Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as  the natural guardian of a minor under the provisio ns 
of this section— 
(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or 
(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the wo rld by becoming a hermit (vanaprastha) or 
an ascetic (yati or sanyasi). 
Explanation. —In this section, the expressions “father” and “mot her” do not include a step-father and 
a step-mother. 
7. Natural guardianship of adopted son. —The natural guardianship of an adopted son who is a 
minor passes, on adoption, to the adoptive father a nd after him to the adoptive mother. 
8. Powers of natural guardian. —(1) The natural guardian of a Hindu minor has power, subject to 
the provisions of this section, to do all acts whic h are necessary or reasonable and proper for the be nefit of 
the minor or for the realization, protection or ben efit of the minor's estate; but the guardian can in  no case 
bind the minor by a personal covenant. 
(2) The natural guardian shall not, without the previ ous permission of the court,— 
(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, ex change or otherwise, any part of the 
immovable property of the minor; or 
(b) lease any part of such property for a term exceed ing five years or for a term extending more 
than one year beyond the date on which the minor wi ll attain majority. 
(3) Any disposal of immovable property by a natural g uardian, in contravention of sub-section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2), is voidable at the instance of the minor or any person claiming under him. 
(4) No court shall grant permission to the natural gu ardian to do any of the acts mentioned in sub-
section ( 2) except in case of necessity or for an evident adv antage to the minor. 
  4 
 (5) The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (8 of 1890), sh all apply to and in respect of an application for 
obtaining the permission of the court under sub-sec tion ( 2) in all respects as if it were an application for 
obtaining the permission of the court under section  29 of that Act, and in particular—           
(a) proceedings in connection with the application sh all be deemed to be proceedings under that 
Act within the meaning of section 4A thereof; 
(b) the court shall observe the procedure and have th e powers specified in sub-sections ( 2), (3) 
and ( 4) of section 31 of that Act; and 
(c) an appeal shall lie from an order of the court re fusing permission to the natural guardian to do 
any of the Acts mentioned in sub-section ( 2) of this section to the court to which appeals ord inarily lie 
from the decisions of that court. 
(6) In this section, “Court” means the city civil cou rt or a district court or a court empowered under 
section 4A of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (8 of 1890), within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the immovable property in respect of w hich the application is made is situate, and where the 
immovable property is situate within the jurisdicti on of more than one such court, means the court wit hin 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction any portion of the property is situate. 
9. Testamentary guardians and their powers. —(1) A Hindu father entitled to act as the natural 
guardian of his minor legitimate children may, by w ill appoint a guardian for any of them in respect o f the 
minor’s person or in respect of the minor’s propert y (other than the undivided interest referred to in  
section 12) or in respect of both. 
(2) An appointment made under sub-section ( 1) shall have no effect if the father predeceases th e 
mother, but shall revive if the mother dies without  appointing, by will, any person as guardian. 
(3) A Hindu widow entitled to act as the natural guar dian of her minor legitimate children, and a 
Hindu mother entitled to act as the natural guardia n of her minor legitimate children by reason of the  fact 
that the father has become disentitled to act as su ch, may, by will, appoint a guardian for any of the m in 
respect of the minor’s person or in respect of the minor’s property (other than the undivided interest  
referred to in section 12) or in respect of both. 
(4) A Hindu mother entitled to act as the natural gua rdian of her minor illegitimate children may; by 
will, appoint a guardian for any of them in respect  of the minor’s person or in respect of the minor's  
property or in respect of both. 
(5) The guardian so appointed by will has the right t o act as the minor’s guardian after the death of 
the minor’s father or mother, as the case may be, a nd to exercise all the rights of a natural guardian  under 
this Act to such extent and subject to such restric tions, if any, as are specified in this Act and in the will. 
(6) The right of the guardian so appointed by will sh all, where the minor is a girl, cease on her 
marriage. 
10. Incapacity of minor to act as guardian of prope rty.—A minor shall be incompetent to act as 
guardian of the property of any minor. 
11. De facto  guardian not to deal with minor’s property. —After the commencement of this Act, 
no person shall be entitled to dispose of, or deal with, the property of a Hindu minor merely on the g round 
of his or her being the de facto  guardian of the minor. 
12. Guardian not to be appointed for minors undivid ed interest in joint family property. —
Where a minor has an undivided interest in joint fa mily property and the property is under the 
management of an adult member of the family, no gua rdian shall be appointed for the minor in respect o f 
such undivided interest: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deem ed to affect the jurisdiction of a High Court to 
appoint a guardian in respect of such interest. 
13. Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration. —(1) In the appointment of declaration of 
any person as guardian of a Hindu minor by a court,  the welfare of the minor shall be the paramount 
consideration. 
(2) No person shall be entitled to the guardianship b y virtue of the provisions of this Act or of any la w 
relating to guardianship in marriage among Hindus, if the court is of opinion that his or her guardian ship 
will not be for the welfare of the minor. 
Company
: 
Sol Infotech Pvt. Ltd.
Website
: 
www.courtkutchehry.com
ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY 
(CENTRAL)
RULES, 1950
CONTENTS
1. 
Short 
title
2. 
Definitions
 
3. 
Conditions of service 
of the Custodian General and other Officers
 
4. 
Omitted
5. 
Omitted
6. 
Manner of Inquiry under Sec 7
 
7. 
Notification of Evacuee 
Property under sub-section (3) of section
7
 
8. 
Notice to surrender 
possession under sub-section (4) of section 8
9. 
Procedure under Sec. 9
 
10. 
Mode of taking 
possession of immoveable property
 
11. 
Mode of taking 
possession of tangible moveable property
12. 
Mode 
of taking possession of other moveable property
 
13. 
Preparation of 
inventory of moveable property
14. 
Cancellation 
or variation of leases and allotments
 
15. 
Procedure for 
restoration of property
 
15A. 
Procedure for making 
applications for grant of certificates
under Sec. 16
 
15AA. 
Certain 
applications for grant of a certificate under Sec. 16
may be entertained 
although made beyond time
15B. 
Classes 
of persons to whom certificates under Sec. 16 may be
granted
 
15C. 
Conditions 
subject to which certificates under Sec. 16 may be
granted
 
16. 
Terms and conditions 
which a Custodian may impose while
making an order for restoration of 
property under Sec. 16
17. 
Omitted
18. 
Enquiries under Sec. 22 in 
pending cases
 
19. 
Omitted
20. 
Procedure for the confirmation 
of transfers under Sec. 40
 
20A. 
Application for obtaining 
previous approval under Sec. 40 in
respect of transfers
 
21. 
Omitted
22. 
Omitted
23. 
Management of trust properties
24. 
Leases of evacuee property
25. 
Method of payment of amounts due 
to the Custodian
 
26. 
Administration 
and other charges
 
27. 
Administration 
charges for moveable properties
 
28. 
Manner of service or publication 
of notice, summons or order
 29. 
Omitted
30. 
Examination 
of witnesses
30A. 
Transfer 
of cases
 
31. 
Appeals, 
review and revisions
 
32. 
Fees
 
33. 
Basic record of 
property to be maintained in property section
 
34. 
Powers of managers
35. 
Fees for inspection and copies
 
36. 
Seal
37. 
Restitution
38. 
Receipts
39. 
Maintenance 
of records and registers
 
40. 
Personal deposit account to be 
closed
 
41. 
Payments
42. 
Omitted
43. 
Payment 
by Custodian
 
44. 
Monthly 
State,emt pf ad,omostratove cjarges
45. 
Omitted
 
46. 
Record of payments
47. 
Omitted
48. 
Omitted
49. 
Repeal
 
ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY 
(CENTRAL)
RULES, 1950
S.R.O. 811 dated 28th September, 1950.- In 
exercise of the
powers conferred by Sec. 56 of the Administration of 
Evacuee
Property Act, 1950 (No. 31 of 1950), the Central Government 
is
pleased to make the following Rules, namely:
1.
 
Short title
 :-
These Rules may be called the 
Administration of Evacuee Property
(Central) Rules, 1950.
2.
 
Definitions
 :-
In these Rules:
(a) "The Act" means the Administration 
of Evacuee Property Act,
1950 (Act No. 31 of 1950).
(b) "Form" means a form appended to 
these Rules.
(c) "Section" and "sub-section" mean, 
respectively, a section and asub-section of the Act.
(d) All other terms and expressions used 
herein but not defined
shall have the meaning respectively 
assigned to them in the Act.
3.
 
Conditions of service of the Custodian General and other
Officers
 
:-
(1) The Custodian General and all 
Officers appointed by or under
him, shall, subject to any special 
contract to the contrary, be
governed by the Central Civil Service 
Rules applicable to the class
of officers to which the Custodian 
General or such officers belong.
(2) If any question arises as to the 
class of officers to which the
Custodian General or any such 
officer belongs the decision of the
Central Government thereon 
shall be final.
4.
 
Omitted
 :-
The Central Government may appoint as many 
Deputy and
Assistant Custodians General as it may deem necessary to 
assist
the Custodian General in the discharge of his functions. Such
Deputy and Assistant Custodians General shall perform such
functions 
as the Custodian General may assign to them.
5.
 
Omitted
 :-
xxx xxx xxx
6.
 
Manner of Inquiry under Sec 7
 :-
(1) Where the Custodian is satisfied 
from information in his
possession or otherwise that any property 
or an interest therein is
prima fade evacuee property, he shall 
cause a notice to be served,
in Form No. 1, on the person claiming 
title to such property or
interest and on any other person or 
persons whom he considers to
be interested in the property.(2) The notice shall, as far as 
practicable, mention the grounds on
which the property is sought 
to be declared evacuee property and
shall specify the provision of 
the Act under which the person
claiming any title to, or interest 
in, such property is alleged to be
an evacuee.
(3) The notice shall be served 
personally, but if that is not
practicable, the rule 28.
(4) Where a notice has been duly served, 
and the party called upon
to show cause why the property should 
not be declared as evacuee
property, fails to appear on the date 
fixed for hearing, the
Custodian may proceed to hear the matter ex 
parte and pass such
order on the material before him as he deems 
fit.
(5) Where such party appears and 
contests the notice he shall
forthwith file a written statement 
verified in the same manner as a
pleading under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, stating the
reasons why he should not be deemed 
to be an evacuee and why
the property or his interest therein 
should not be declared as
evacuee property. Any person or persons 
claiming to be interested
in the enquiry or in the property being 
declared as evacuee
property, may file a reply to such written 
state- ment. The
Custodian shall then, either on the same day or 
on any subsequent
day to which the hearing may be adjourned, 
proceed to hear the
evidence, if any, which the party appearing to 
show cause may
produce and also evidence which the party claiming 
to be
interested as mentioned above may adduce.
(6) After the whole evidence has been 
duly recorded in a summary
manner, the Custodian shall proceed to 
pronounce his order. The
order shall state the points for 
determination, and the findings
thereon with brief reasons.
7.
 
Notification of Evacuee Property under sub-section (3) of
section 
7
 :-(1) The Custodian, after holding such 
enquiry, as he deems fit and
on being satisfied that a particular 
property is evacuee property,
shall notify the same in the 
Official Gazette or in any local
newspaper or on the notice board 
kept for that purpose in his
office. In the last mentioned case, 
the Custodian may, in addition,
cause a copy of the notification 
to be affixed on the evacuee
property.
(2) The notification shall be in Form 2 
and shall give full particulars
of the property regarding the 
location, municipal numbers, etc. In
case of agricultural land, it 
shall specify, as far as possible, its
khasra number and the 
village where it is situated. Any error or
irregularity in the 
drawing up or the publication of the notifica- tion
shall not be 
deemed to detract from the validity of such a
notification or 
other- wise afford a valid defence to claim of the
Custodian to 
the property as having vested in him.
(3) A list of all such evacuee property 
brought up-to-date in each
State shall be published once a year, 
in the official Gazette or in
such other manner as the Custodian 
deems fit.
8.
 
Notice to surrender possession under sub-section (4) of
section 8
 
:-
(1) On the publication of a notification 
under rule 7 a notice in
Form 3 demanding surrender of possession 
may be served on the
occupant or holder of evacuee property, 
calling upon him to
surrender possession to the Custodian or a 
person authorised by
him in this behalf within the time specified 
in the notice, provided
that in any emergent case, the Custodian 
may require the occupant
to give up possession immediately and the 
premises may be sealed
at once.
(2) A notice under sub-rule (1) shall be 
signed by an officer not
below the rank of Assistant Custodian.9.
 
Procedure under Sec. 9
 :-
(1) Where a notice has been duly served 
on the occupant or holder
of the property under rule 8 and the 
possession is not delivered as
required, the officer who issued 
the notice or any other officer not
below the rank of a Deputy 
Custodian, may issue a warrant of
eviction or seizure in Form 4. 
One copy of the warrant shall be
forwarded to the 
officer-in-charge of Police Station within the
territorial limits 
of which the property concerned is for the time
being, to be found 
or such other officer as may be in charge of
carrying out 
evictions or seizures, who shall forthwith take steps to
effect 
the eviction or seizure with the use of such force as may be
necessary.
(2) Every police officer to whom a 
warrant of eviction or seizure is
sent for execution shall submit 
a weekly report to the Deputy
Superintendent of Police having 
jurisdiction and a copy thereof to
the Custodian, giving details 
of number of warrants entrusted to as
well as executed by him 
together with such other particulars as
may be necessary.
(3) A register of warrants shall be 
maintained by the Custodian and
such register shall contain the 
following particulars:-
(a) Name of owner.
(b) Description of property.
(c) Name of the person against whom the 
warrant is to be
executed.
(d) Date of issue and service of 
surrender notice.
(e) The Final result.(4) The Custodian, the Additional 
Custodian or the Authorised
Deputy Custodian of his own motion or 
on the motion of the party
aggrieved, may stay any eviction 
proceeding pending disposal of
the appeal against the order 
declaring the property to be evacuee
property.
10.
 
Mode of taking possession of immoveable property
 :-
(1) Where, any evacuee property, which 
vests in the Custodian, is
in the possession of either the evacuee 
himself or any other person,
whether holding on behalf of or 
under, the evacuee or otherwise,
but having no lawful title to the 
possession of such property
enforceable against the Custodian, 
possession may be taken by
evicting the person in possession of 
such property in accordance
with the manner provided in the Act 
and these rules.
(2) Where such property is, at the time 
aforesaid, in the possession
of one or more tenants or one or more 
lessees or licensees whom
the Custodian cannot eject or, for any 
reason, does not want to
eject, possession may be taken by serving 
on the tenants or the
lessees or the licensees a notice directing 
them to pay the rent or
the lease-money or the license fee, as the 
case may be, to the
Custodian or to any person authorised by him 
to receive such
payment. The notice may be served in any manner 
provided in rule
25. Where such property is an undivided share in 
joint property:
(a) If under some arrangement inter se 
the co-sharer, the evacuee
was in separate possession of any part 
of the joint property,
possession may be taken of such part in 
accordance with the
manner provided in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule 
(2), whichever is
applicable.
(b) In any other case, constructive 
possession may be taken by
affixing a copy of the warrant for 
possession on a conspicuous part
of the property, and if 
considered necessary by proclamation, by
beat of drum in the 
locality in which the property is situated:11.
 
Mode of taking possession of tangible moveable
property
 :-
Where 
the property to be taken possession of is tangible moveable
property, possession may be taken by actual seizure and after such
seizure the Custodian may either keep the property in his own
custody or entrust it to a supurdar on the latter furnishing 
security
in Form No. 5. Provided that where the property is subject 
to
speedy or natural decay or the expense of keeping it is likely to 
be
out of proportion to its value, the Custodian may sell it 
forthwith.
12.
 
Mode of taking possession of other moveable property
 :-
(1) Where property to be taken 
possession of is a debt or a legacy
or interest payable on a debt 
or a legacy, possession may be taken
by serving the party liable 
with a notice, requiring such party to
pay the same to the 
Custodian or any other person authorised by
him to receive the 
payment.
(2) Where such property is a share in a 
joint-stock-company, not
being a joint- stock-company referred to 
in sub-clause (2) (ii) of
clause (f) of Section 2 of the Act, 
possession may be taken by
informing the principal officer of such 
company that the share has
vested in the Custodian.
(3) Where such property consists of 
Government or other securities,
stock, or debentures, possession 
may be taken by serving upon the
appropriate authority a notice 
requiring such authority to make all
payments in respect of such 
securities, stock, or debentures to the
Custodian or any other 
person authorised by him in this behalf.
(4) Where such property is a running 
business or a share in such
business) the Custodian may take 
possession of the stock-in-trade
and other assets of the business 
and may further take such steps
as he considers necessary either 
for the continuance or for the
winding-up of such business.13.
 
Preparation of inventory of moveable property
 :-
Where 
the Custodian takes possession of any moveable property
including 
any stock-in-trade or plant or machinery or any
undertaking, he 
shall cause an inventory to be prepared of the
property in Form No. 
6, in triplicate, in the presence of not less
than two residents of 
the locality. The inventory shall be signed by
the person by whom it 
was prepared and each of the two witnesses
and shall be 
countersigned by the Custodian. One copy of the
inventory shall be 
made over to the supuidar (if any) and two
copies shall be retained 
by the Custodian.
14.
 
Cancellation or variation of leases and allotments
 :-
(1) The Custodian shall not ordinarily 
vary the terms of a lease
subsisting at the time he takes 
possession of immoveable property
or cancel any such lease or 
evict a person who is lawfully in
occupation of such property 
under a lease granted by the lessor
before he became an evacuee 
and not in anticipation of becoming
an evacuee unless the 
Custodian is satis- fied that the lessee has
done or omitted to do 
something which renders him liable to
eviction under any law for 
the time being in force.
(2) In case of a lease or allotment 
granted by the Custodian
himself, the Custodian may evict a person 
on any ground justifying
eviction of a tenant under any law 
relating to the Control of Rents
for the time being in force in 
the State concerned, or for any
violation of the conditions of the 
lease or the allotment.
1
(3) The 
Custodian may cancel an allotment and evict the allottee
if he is 
satisfied that-
(i) the allottee has secured the 
allotment by misrepresentation or
fraud; or
(ii) the allottee is in possession of 
more than one evacuee property
of the same kind, that is to say, 
more than one residential
premises, more than one business 
premises or more than oneindustrial premises; or
(iii) the allottee is in occupation or 
accommodation which, in the
opinion of the Custodian, is in excess 
of the requirement of the
allottee; or
(iv) the allottee or any person, 
normally residing with him or
dependent on him, has built a house 
or otherwise acquired
residential accommo- dation; or
(v) the allottee or any person, normally 
residing with him or
dependent on him, has been granted by the 
Government a plot of
land for constructing a house thereon; or
(vi) the allottee has obtained gainful 
employment in a place other
than the place where the evacuee 
property allotted to him is
situate :
(a) if the allottee or a person normally 
residing with him or
dependent on him has let out his house or 
other residential
accommodation referred to in Cl. (iv), unless 
the allottee has been
served with a notice for a period of not 
less than three months ;
(b) if the allottee or a person normally 
residing with him or
dependent on him has failed to construct a 
house on the plot of
land allotted to him, unless the allottee has 
been served with a
notice for a period of not less than six 
months.]
(4) Before cancelling, or varying the 
terms of a lease or before
evicting any lessee the Custodian shall 
serve the person or the
persons concerned with a notice to show 
cause against the order
proposed to be made and shall afford him a 
reasonable opportunity
of being heard.
(5) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed 
to abridge or limit thepower of the Custodian to cancel, or vary 
the terms of a lease
relating to evacuee property, or to evict a 
lessee of such property
where he is of the opinion that, for 
reasons to be recorded in
writing it is necessary or expedient to 
do so for the preservation, or
the proper administration or the 
management of such property or
for carrying out any other object 
of the Act.
2
[(6) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, the
Custodian of 
Evacuee Property in the 
3
[State of 
Punjab] shall not
exercise the power of cancelling any allot- ment 
of rural evacuee
property on a quasi-permanent basis, or varying 
the terms of any
such allotment except in the following 
circumstances:
(i) where the allotment was made 
although the allottee owned no
agricultural land in Pakistan;
(ii) where the allottee has obtained 
land in excess of the area to
which he was entitled under the 
scheme of allotment of land
prevailing at the time of the 
allotment;
4
[(iii) 
where the allotment is to be cancelled or varied-
(a) in accordance with an order made by 
a competent authority
under S.8 of the East Punjab Refugees 
(Registration of Land
Claims) Act, 1948;
(b) on account of the failure of the 
allottee to take possession of
the allotted evacuee property 
within six months of the date of
allotment;
(c) in consequence of a voluntary 
surrender of the allotted evacuee
property or a voluntary exchange 
with other available rural evacuee
property, or a mutual exchange 
with such other available property;
(d) in accordance with any general or 
special order of the CentralGovernment:]
Section 26 
5
 [ or Section 27 ] of the 
Act, within the prescribed time against an
order passed by a lower 
authority or before 22nd July 1952)].
1. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 1673, 
dated 21st May, 1954
2. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 1290, 
dated 22nd July, 1952.
3. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 667, dated 
20th February, 1957.
4. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 351, dated 
13th February, 1953.
5. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 667, dated 
20th February, 1957.
15.
 
Procedure for restoration of property
 :-
(1) An application for restoration of 
evacuee property shall be made
to the Central Government or to any 
person authorised by the
Central Government in this behalf.
(2) The application shall contain the 
names of the persons
interested in the property sought to be 
restored and the facts on
which the claim for restoration is based.
(3) The application shall be verified in 
the same manner as a plaint
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908.
(4) Before any order is made on the 
application, the Central
Government or the authorised person, as 
the case may be, shall
cause an inquiry to be held through the 
Custodian-General or the
Custodian or any other person.
(5)
(a) On receipt of the application, the 
Central Government or the
authorised person, as the case may be, 
shall cause a notice of the
application to be given to the party 
or parties named in the
application and any other person who may 
otherwise appear to beinterested in the property or the 
proceedings.
(b) A public notice of the application 
shall also be issued in a local
daily or a weekly newspaper at the 
expense of the applicant.]
15A.
 
Procedure for making applications for grant of
certificates under 
Sec. 16
 :-
(1) An application 
1
[* 
* *] for restoration of evacuee property
under sub- section (1) of 
Section 16 shall not be entertained
unless-
(a) where an order declaring the 
property to be evacuee property
was made before the 21st May, 1954 
(hereinafter referred to as the
"appointed date")-
(i) all appeals and 
revision-applications permissible under the Act
against such order 
have either become time-barred on the
appointed date or have been 
filed and disposed of before that date,
and the application is 
made within sixty days of such date; or
(ii) where the period of limitation of 
filing such appeals or revision-
applications has not expired on 
the appointed date, such appeals
and revision applications have 
been filed and the application is
made within sixty days of the 
Final order of the Custodian-General
in the case;
(b) where an order declaring the 
property to be evacuee property is
made after the appointed date-
(i) all appeals and revision 
applications permissible under the Act
against such order have 
been Filed and the Custodian-General has
made a Final order in the 
case ; and(ii) the application is made within 
sixty- days of the Final order of
the Custodian-General;
(c) where any proceedings for declaring 
the property to be evacuee
property are pending on the appointed 
date and the application is
made within sixty days of the Final 
order of the Custodian-General
in the case.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub-rule (1), an
application 
2
[* 
* * for restoration of evacuee property under sub-
section (1) of 
Section 16 by an evacuee who migrated to West
Pakistan from the 
State of Uttar Pradesh during the period between
the 1st February, 
1950 and 31st May, 1950 and who is permitted
to return to India 
for permanent resettlement, may be entertained
if it is made 
within sixty days of the appointed date or of the date
of the 
return of the evacuee to India, whichever is later.
(3) Nothing in this rule shall apply to 
an application 
2
 [* * *] for
restoration of evacuee property under sub-section (1) of Section 
16
which is pending on the appointed date.
1. The words "for a certificate" omitted 
by S.R.O. 667, dated 20th
February, 1957.
2. The Words "for a certificate" omitted 
by S.R.O. 667, dated 20th
February 1957.
15AA.
 
Certain applications for grant of a certificate under
Sec. 16 may 
be entertained although made beyond time
 :-
An 
application for restoration of an evacuee property made under
sub-section (1) of Section 16 before the commencement of the
Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1954 (42 of
1954), which is pending on such commencement, may be
entertained, 
notwithstanding that the period of limitation specified
in rule 15A 
for making such an application had expired.]
15B.
 
Classes of persons to whom certificates under Sec. 16
may be 
granted
 :-1
[ An order for 
restoration under Section 16 may be made in favour
of the following 
classes of persons, namely :]
2
 [(1) Any 
person who, since the 1st day of March, 1947, has
continued to 
reside in India and did not at any time migrate to
Pakistan and 
whose property has been declared as evacuee
property ;
(2)
(a) any person who, on or after the 1st 
March, 1947, migrated from
India to
(b) any person who left for Pakistan 
before 15th October, 1952, on
a temporary visit taking with 
himself a "No objection to return"
certificate and-
(i) returned to India on or before 15th 
October, 1952, under a valid
permit issued under Influx from 
Pakistan (Control) Act, 1949, as
then in force, for permanent 
return to India : Provided that such
person has not thereafter 
made any other journey to Pakistan
except in similar circumstances 
and subject to the same conditions,
or in the circum- stances and 
subject to the conditions specified in
Cl. (c) ; or
(ii) has returned or returns, on or 
after the 15th October, 1952, on
the authority of an Indian 
passport, or repatriation certificate, or
emer- gency certificate, 
or certificate of identity or, in the case of a
seaman, a 
continuous discharge certificate, issued by a competent
authority 
under any law regulating travel between India and
Pakistan : 
Provided that such person has not thereafter made any
other 
journey except in the circumstances and subject to the
conditions 
specified in Cl. (c) ;
(c) any person who has left or leaves 
for Pakistan on or after the
15th October, 1952, on a temporary 
visit taking with himself anIndian Passport or emer- ency 
certificate, or certificate of identity
or, in the case of a 
seaman, a continuous discharge certificate
issued by a competent 
authority under any law regulating travel
between India and 
Pakistan and has returned or returns to India
during the period 
for which any such travel document was or is
valid;
(d) any person who came from Pakistan to 
India before the 18th
October, 1949, under a valid permit issued 
under the Influx from
Pakistan (Control) Act, 1949, as then in 
force, for permanent
resettlement in India: Provided that-
(i) no member of the family of such 
person wholly dependent upon
his earnings for the provision of the 
ordinary necessities of life has
after his return remained behind 
in Pakistan with his approval or
consent;
(ii) such person has not subsequently 
left for Pakistan except in the
circum- stances and subject to the 
conditions specified in Cl. (b) or
Cl. (c); and
(iii) no member of the family of such 
person hereinbefore described
has subse- quently left for Pakistan 
with his approval or consent.
(3) Meos belonging to Alwar and 
Bharatpur districts in the State of
Rajasthan, and Gurgaon 
District in the State of Punjab, who
migrated to Pakistan but who 
have returned to India, before the
18th day of October, 1949 for 
permanent resettlement in India.
(4) Evacuees who migrated to West 
Pakistan from the State of
Uttar Pradesh ring the period between 
the 1st February, 1950 and
31st May, 1950 and who are permitted to 
return to India for
permanent resettlement in accordance with the 
arrangements
agreed upon by the Government of India and the 
Government of
Pakistan.Nationals of any foreign country who are not settled in Pakistan and 
who have not
acquired any right to, or interest in, or benefit from, 
any property which is treated
as evacuee or abandoned property under 
any law for the time being in force in
Pakistan: Provided nothing in 
this rule shall apply to any person who has settled in
Pakistan and 
has been visiting India merely for the purpose of looking after his
property or other interest.
1. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 667, dated 
20th February, 1957.
2. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 1673, 
dated 21st May, 1954.
15C.
 
Conditions subject to which certificates under Sec. 16
may be 
granted
 :-
1
 [An order for 
the restoration of any property under Section 16
may contain] all or 
any of the following conditions, namely:
(i) That the person to whom property is 
restored shall not evict any
allottee except in the circumstances 
in which lessees can be evicted
under any law for the time being 
in force;
(ii) where the person to whom the 
property is restored is given
vacant possession of the property, 
he shall pay such compensation
to the allottees in respect of any 
improvements made by them on
the property as may be determined by 
the Custodian;
(iii) such other conditions as the 
Central Government may specify in
the certificate.
1. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 667, dated 
20th February, 1957.
16.
 
Terms and conditions which a Custodian may impose
while making an 
order for restoration of property under
Sec. 16
 :-
Without 
prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
Section 
16 on the subject a Custodian may, while making an order
for the 
restoration of any evacuee property under that section,
impose any 
terms or conditions which he considers to be just and
proper, having 
regard to the commitments already made, or action
already taken by 
him in the exercise of his functions under the Act,
or which 
otherwise seem to be necessary for carrying out the
purpose of the 
Act.17.
 
Omitted
 :-
xxx xxx xxx
18.
 
Enquiries under Sec. 22 in pending cases
 :-
(1) The provisions of this rule shall 
apply to proceedings pending
under Sec. 22 on the commencement of 
the Administration of
Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1953 (11 
of 1953).
(2) In addition to the circumstances 
mentioned in the explanation
to Section 22 the following shall be 
deemed to constitute a
preparation for migration to Pakistan :
(i) Disposal of the bulk of ones 
household effects,
(ii) disposal of assets essential to 
ones profession, practice or
calling or trade such as the disposal 
of medical books and
equipment by a doctor, the disposal of law 
books by a practising
lawyer and the disposal of his stock-in- 
trade by a trader, and
(iii) disposal of the tools and 
instruments by which a person earns
his livelihood.
(3) After a notice has been served on a 
person against whom any
proceedings are pending under Sec. 22 on 
the commencement of
the Administration of Evacuee Property 
(Amendment) Act, 1953
(11 of 1953), if the person fails to appear 
on the date specified in
the notice the Custodian shall proceed to 
give the findings exparte.
(4) If the party appears and puts in 
objections, his objections shall
be decided after giving him a 
reasonable opportunity of adducing
evidence in support of his 
objections. The Custodian may, in his
discretion, allow any other 
party to produce evidence in rebuttal of
such evidence and may 
himself call such evidence as he deems Fit.(5) After hearing all the evidence, the 
Custodian shall proceed to
pronounce his order.]
19.
 
Omitted
 :-
xxx xxx xxx
20.
 
Procedure for the confirmation of transfers under Sec.
40
 :-
(1) An appli- cation for confirmation 
under 
1
[ sub-section (1) of
Section 
40 ] shall contain the following particulars, namely:
(a) Boundaries, Municipal number and 
location of the property and
also khasra number in case of 
agricultural land.
(b) Particulars of transfer sought to be 
confirmed including the
dates of the transfer and registration, if 
any, the addresses of the
parties and the consi- deration paid or 
deferred.
(c) Particulars of any previous 
transfers in respect of the property.
(d) The name and address of the person 
in possession of the
property trans- ferred and the capacity in 
which such person is in
possession.
(2) The application shall be verified in 
the manner prescribed in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for 
verification of pleadings and shall
be accompanied by a copy of 
the transfer deed in question and also
a schedule containing the 
particulars of any other property owned,
possessed or transferred 
by the transferor after 1st March, 1947.
(3) The application shall be presented 
by the transferor or the
transferee personally or by any person 
claiming under, or lawfully
authorized by either of them.(4) The Custodian shall cause a notice 
in Form No. 7 to be served
on the trans- feror or transferee, as 
the case may be, and may
further cause a similar notice to be 
served on any person whom the
Custodian considers to be interested 
in, or likely to be affected by
the result of the application.
(5) A public notice shall also be 
published in a daily newspaper at
the expense of the applicant.
(6) If any application referred to in 
sub-rule (1) is pending on the
date these rules came into force, 
the applicant may, within thirty
days from such date or within 
such period as the Custodian may by
order specify, amend his 
application so as to bring it in conformity
with these rules and 
may also make up the deficiency, if any, in the
fee leviable on 
such application: Provided that the Custodian on
sufficient cause 
being shown may extend the period prescribed by
this sub-rule.
(7) In case the applicant fails to amend 
the application in
accordance with sub- rule (6) the Custodian may 
dismiss the
application or proceed to decide it on the material 
before him.
(8) After notices are served in 
accordance with the provisions of
sub-rules (4) and (5) the 
Custodian shall after a summary enquiry
proceed to determine the 
application.
(9) If a party making an application 
fails to appear on the date
fixed when the case is called for 
hearing, the Custodian may
dismiss the application for default or 
proceed to decide the
application in the absence of the party, on 
the materials before
him.
(10) Where the application is dismissed 
under sub-rule (9) the
applicant shall be precluded from making a 
fresh application on the
same facts with respect to the same 
property. But the applicant
may apply within thirty days from the 
date the order of dismissal iscommunicated to him for an order 
setting aside the dismissal and
the Custodian, if he is satisfied 
that there was sufficient cause for
non-appearance when the case 
was called for hearing, shall make
an order setting aside the 
order of dismissal upon such terms as he
thinks fit and shall fix 
a date for proceeding with the application.
(11) The Custodian shall refuse to 
confirm any transfer which he
has reasonable grounds to believe to 
be colourable or benami.
2
 [(12) 
Where any evacuee property is auctioned in pursuance of
sub-clause 
(v) of Cl. (b) of sub-section (5) of Section 40 the
transferee 
shall be permitted to bid at the auction and if his bid is
accepted, the amount actually paid by the transferee as consi-
deration for the property shall be set-off against any bid made by
him at the auction: Provided that if the amount bid by the
transferee falls short of the amount actually paid by him he shall
not be entitled to any refund of the balance.]
1. Subs. by Rule 19 omitted by 
Notification S.R.O. 1673, dated
21st May, 1954.
2. Ins. by Notification S.R.O. 1673, dated 
21st May, 1954.
20A.
 
Application for obtaining previous approval under Sec.
40 in 
respect of transfers
 :-
(1) An application for obtaining 
previous approval under Section 40
in respect of transfer shall 
contain the following particulars namely
:
(a) Name and address of the transferor.
(b) Boundaries, Municipal number and 
location of the property as
also khasra number in the case of 
agricultural land.
(c) Nature of the right proposed to be 
transferred.(d) Whether any proceedings under the 
Act are pending for
declaring the property to be evacuee property.
(e) The consideration agreed upon for 
the transfer of the property.
(2) Where an application is made for 
previous approval to the
Custodian under Section 40 , the 
Custodian shall give such
approval unless proceedings in respect 
of the property which is
sought to be transferred are pending 
under the Act for declaring
the property to be evacuee property.]
21.
 
Omitted
 :-
xxx xxx xxx
22.
 
Omitted
 :-
xxx xxx xxx
23.
 
Management of trust properties
 :-
Trust properties may 
be managed by the Custodian in the same
manner as other evacuee 
property, but in case of public trust of
religious or charitable 
nature, lecourse may be had to Section 92 of
the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 , if the circumstances so require.
24.
 
Leases of evacuee property
 :-
Any evacuee property may 
be leased out by the Custodian for a
period not exceeding the period 
specified in any general or special
directions issued by or under 
the authority of the Central
Government.
25.
 
Method of payment of amounts due to the Custodian
 :-
(1) Rents, rates, lease money, sale 
proceeds and other amounts
payable to the Custodian in respect of 
evacuee property under the
Act or under these rules shall be 
tendered in cash or postal money
order to the Cashier in the 
office of the Custodian or to any otherperson who may be 
authorised by the Custodian in this behalf to
receive such money.
(2) The person receiving the money on 
behalf of the Custodian
shall issue a receipt in Form No. 8. 
Receipts issued by the person
making realisation on behalf of the 
Custodian on the spot shall,
however, be prepared in Form No. 9 by 
carbon process by using
double-sided carbon paper.
(3) Crossed cheques may, at the 
discretion of the Custodian be
accepted. In case of out-station 
cheques, the amount on account of
bank commission should also be 
added to the amount due to the
Custodian. No receipt for any 
cheque shall be valid discharge of any
liability unless the cheque 
is cashed.
26.
 
Administration and other charges
 :-
(1) A fee equivalent to 10 per cent of 
gross realisations made from
evacuee property shall be charged as 
adminis- tration charges from
the date on which the property is 
taken over by the Custodian.
Explanation:- This sub-rule applies to 
part "C" States only.
(2) A fee equivalent to 10 per cent of 
gross realisation made from
evacuee property shall be charged on 
account of maintenance and
normal repairs from the date on which 
the.property is taken over
by the Custodian.
1
 [ (3) 
Nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle the
Custodian to recover any charges. On account of the
Administration, maintenance or repairs of any evacuee property
from the sale-proceeds thereof but where any such property is
disposed of by sale, it shall be lawful for the Custodian to 
realise
from the sale-proceeds only such amount as is, in his 
opinion,
sufficient to defray the expenses incurred in connection 
with, or
incidental to, the disposal of such property.](4) In addition to normal repairs the 
Custodian may also spend
such amounts on special repairs to the 
property as are sanctioned
by the Central Government or the 
Custodian General. Such
expenditure on special repairs will in the 
first instance be met out
of the income of the property and if 
there is not sufficient income,
it will be debited against the 
capital value of the property.
1. Ins. by S.R.O. 1673, dated 21st May, 
1954.
27.
 
Administration charges for moveable properties
 :-
(1) Where any moveable evacuee property 
is returned under
Section 16 , or is disposed of by sale or is 
otherwise released, the
Custodian may recover such administration 
charges or other
charges on account of the maintenance, repair, 
transport or storage
of such property and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as the State
Government may by general or a 
special order from time to time,
direct.
(2) This rule applies to Part "C" States 
only.]
28.
 
Manner of service or publication of notice, summons or
order
 
:-
Service or publication of any notice, summons or order 
under the
Act or under these Rules shall be effected in one or more 
of the
following modes namely:
(1) By giving or tendering it to the 
person concerned or his
manager or agent, if any.
(2) By leaving it at the last known 
place of business of the person
concerned or by giving or 
tendering it to some adult member of the
family.(3) By sending the notice, summons or 
order by registered post.
(4) By affixing the notice, summons or 
order on some conspicuous
part of the
29.
 
Omitted
 :-
xxx xxx xxx
30.
 
Examination of witnesses
 :-
The Custodian shall be 
entitled to issue a commission for recording
statement on oath of 
any person, as provided in Or.26 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 
1908.
30A.
 
Transfer of cases
 :-
(1) On the application of any of the 
parties and after notice to the
parties and after hearing such of 
them as desired to be heard or of
his own motion and without such 
notice, the Custodian General or
the Custodian may at any stage of 
any proceeding pending before
any officer subordinate to him 
withdraw it to himself and-
(i) try to dispose of it himself; or
(ii) transfer it for trial or disposal 
to any other officer subordinate to
him and competent to try or 
dispose of the same; or
(iii) re-transfer the same for trial or 
disposal to the officer from
whom it was withdrawn.
(2) Where any case has been withdrawn 
under sub-rule (1), the
officer who thereafter tries such case 
may, subject to any special
direction in the case of any order of 
transfer, either retry it, or
proceed from the point at which it 
was transferred or withdrawn.]31.
 
Appeals, review and revisions
 :-
(1) All appeals under the Act shall, 
when they lie to 
1
[* * * *] the
Custodian, be filed within thirty days of the date of the order
appealed against and when they lie to the Custodian General,
within sixty days of such date.
(2) The petition of appeal shall be 
presented in person or through a
legal practi- tioner or a 
recognised agent when the appeal lies to
the Custodian 
2
[* 
* * *.] Where an appeal lies to the Custodian
General the petition 
of appeal may be sent by registered post.
(3) Every petition shall state 
succinctly the grounds on which the
order appealed from is 
attacked and shall be accompanied by a
copy of such order unless 
the appellate authority dispenses with
such copy.
(4) Except as otherwise expressly 
provided in the Act or in these
Rules, the procedure laid down in 
Or.61 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, shall, so far as 
applicable, apply to the hearing
and disposal of appeal under the 
Act.
3
[(5) Any 
petition for revision when made to the Custodian-General
shall 
ordinarily be made within sixty days of the date of the order
sought to be. revised. The petition shall be presented in person 
or
through a legal practitioner or a recognised agent or may be 
sent
by registered post. The petition shall be accompanied by a 
copy of
the order sought to be revised and also by a copy of the 
original
order unless the Revising Authority dispenses with the 
production
of any such copy.]
4
(6)* * * 
*.]
(7) 
5
[ In 
computing the period of limitation provided in this rule-
(a) the provisions of Section 4 
6
[* 
* * *] and S.12 of the Indian(a) the provisions of Section 4 
6
[* 
* * *] and S.12 of the Indian
Limitation Act, 1908
7
shall, 
so far as they are applicable, apply to all
petitions of appeal or 
revision ;
(b) the provisions of Section 5 of the 
said Act shall, so far as they
are applicable, apply to all 
petitions of appeal or revision, and shall
be deemed to have 
applied to all such petitions made during the
period commencing on 
the 5th day of June, 1956 and ending on
the 29th day of September, 
1956: Provided that where in respect
of any appeal or revision 
application made to the Custodian or any
officer subordinate to 
him any question arises whether the
provisions of Section 5 of the 
said Act should be applied, the
question shall be referred to the 
Custodian-General whose decision
thereon shall be final.
(7A) Where any petition of appeal or 
revision has been dismissed
by any authority during the period 
specified in Cl. (ft) of sub-rule
(7) on the ground only that such 
petition was barred by limitation
and that time could not be 
extended because S.5 of the Indian
Limitation Act, 1908
8
was 
not applicable the petitioner may, not
later than the 29th day of 
November, 1956, apply to the
Custodian-General for restoration of 
the petition of appeal or
revision, as the case may be, and the 
Custodian-General, if
satisfied that the petitioner had sufficient 
cause for not filing the
petition within time, may set aside the 
order dismissing the petition
and thereupon such petition shall, 
subject to the other provisions of
these rules, be heard on merits 
by the Custodian-General or if the
Custodian-General so directs, 
by the authority which would have
been competent to hear it, if 
the petition had not been dismissed
on the ground aforesaid.]
(8) A notice of any appeal, revision 
9
[* 
* * *] may be given, in
addition to the person concerned, to any 
other person who in the
opinion of the authority hearing the 
appeal, the revision 
9
 [* * * *]
may 
be interested in the same.
(9) Any authority hearing any appeal or 
an application for revision
may admit additional evidence before 
its final disposal or may
remand the case for admission of 
additional evidence and report orfor a fresh decision, as such 
authority may deem fit.
1. The words "the District Judge nominated 
in this behalf or"
omitted by Notification S.R.O. 667, dated 20th 
February, 1957.
2. The Words "or an especially nominated 
District Judge" omitted
by The words "the District Judge nominated 
in this behalf or"
omitted by Notification S.R.O. 667, dated 20th 
February, 1957.
3. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 667, dated 
20th February, 1957.
4. Clause (6) omitted by Subs. by 
Notification S.R.O. 667, dated
20th February, 1957.
5. Subs. by Notification S.R.O. 2183, 
dated 20th September, 1956.
6. The figure "5Z omitted by Notification 
S.R.O. 1385, dated 5th
June, 1956.
7. See now the Limitation Act, 1963.
8. See now the Limitation Act, 1963.
9. The words "or review" omitted by 
Notification S.R.O. 667, dated
20th February, 1957.
32.
 
Fees
 :-
(1) The following fees shall be payable 
in respect of petitions,
appli- cations and appeals under the Act, 
except those presented or
filed by an officer of the Custodian 
Department or any other public
officer as such:
(I)
Appeals-
Rs. P.
 
(i)
To the 
Custodian-
General                                              
20.00
 
 
(ii)
 
To the Custodian or Additional
Custodian 
1
[* 
*]          
 
10.00
 
 
 
 
 
2
[*          *        *         *]
 
 
 
(II)
Petitions-
 
For revision when made to the Custodian-General        
10.00
(III))
Applications-
 
 
(i)
Any application under Sec. 16 for restoration of
10.00 
(i)
Any application under Sec. 16 for restoration of
property
10.00
 
(ii)
Any application under Sec. 40 for confirmation
of transfer-
 
 
 
(a)
Where the consideration for transfer does
not exceed Rs. 1,000.
 
2.00    
 
 
(b)
Where the consideration for the transfer
exceeds Rs. 1,000 but 
does not exceed Rs.
5,000
5.00
   
   
(c)
Where the consideration for the transfer
exceeds Rs. 5,000 but 
does not exceed Rs,
10,000
 
10.00
 
 
(d)
In all other cases
10.00
 
3
[(iii) *  *                *            *]
 
iv
Any application for a copy of any document or
order
0.20
 
(v)
Any application riot otherwise provided for but
made in 
relation to a proceeding under Sec. 7,
16 or 40-
 
   
  
(a)
When made to any Custodian-General
2.00
 
 
(b)
When made to any other officers
1.00
 
(vi)
Any application of a miscellaneous nature not
otherwise 
provided for 
4
[* * *]
0.20
(IV)
(a)
Applications under Sec. 23 for an intending
evacuee being 
called upon to pay up the
efficiency on the consideration paid 
by him for
an evacuee property in Pakistan    
5.00
 
(b)
Application for a copy 
0.20
 
(c)
Application not otherwise provided for but made
in connection 
with proceedings under Secs. 7,
16, 19, 22 and 40-
 
 
 
(i)
When made to the Custodian-General  
2.00
 
 
(ii)
When made to any other officers
1.00
 
 
(iii)
Applications of a miscellaneous nature not
otherwise provided 
for
0.20
(2) No officer authorised to receive any 
appeal, petition or
application shall receive the same unless fee 
payable under this
rule is paid in such manner as the Central 
Government may from
time to time determine.(3) A register shall be maintained in 
the office of every Custodian
showing the fee paid in respect of 
every petition, application or
appeal, and the entries shall be 
checked and countersigned by the
officer by whom the petition 
application or appeal, as the case may
be, is heard or by such 
other officer subordinate to him as he may
authorise in this 
behalf.
1. The words "or the especially designated 
District Judge" omitted
by Notification S.R.O. 667, dated 20th 
February, 1957.
2. Clauses (ii), (iii) and (iv) omitted by 
The words "or the especially
designated District Judge" omitted by 
Notification S.R.O. 667,
dated 20th February, 1957.
3. Omitted by Notification S.R.O. 1673, 
dated 21st May, 1954.
4. Omitted by Notification S.R.O. 1673, 
dated 21st May, 1954.
33.
 
Basic record of property to be maintained in property
section
 
:-
(a) All immoveable property taken 
possession of by the Custodian
shall be recorded in a register in 
Form No. 10. Similar registers
shall be maintained with respect to 
proper- ties of intending
evacuees.
(b) All moveable property taken 
possession of by the Custodian
shall be recorded in a register in 
Form No. 11 and a slip in Form No.
12 shall be attached to each 
article. The officer entrusted with the
custody of such property 
shall be respon- sible for its safe custody
and for protecting it 
from loss, damage or deterioration. He shall
maintain a suitable 
record of the property taken into custody with a
view to 
facilitating check at any time of the article in hand with
those 
shown as such in the Registers. He shall also arrange for
periodical physical verification of the articles in hand.
(c) The account-books, title deeds, and 
other valuables and
documents taken possession of by the Custodian 
shall be noted in
the Register of Valuables in Form No. 13 and a 
slip in Form No. 12
shall be attached to each article.Explanation.- When any property is 
disposed of by sale or
otherwise the details of disposal shall be 
entered in the appropriate
columns of the relevant registers.
34.
 
Powers of managers
 :-
The manager appointed under 
sub-section (2) of Section 10 shall
act under the general 
supervision and control of the Custodian and
may exercise such 
powers as may be delegated in writing to him by
the Custodian from 
time to time.
35.
 
Fees for inspection and copies
 :-
(1) The following fees shall be payable 
by the person desirous of
obtaining any copy from any record 
maintained under the Act or
these rules: Rs. P.
(2) Any person interested in any evacuee 
property may, with the
permission of the Custodian, inspect the 
record relating to such
property on payment of fee of Rs. 2. Any 
person interested in any
original case appeal, revision or review 
pending before the
Custodian-General, or any Custodian may, with 
the permission of
such officer, inspect the record of such case on 
payment of a similar
fee.
(3) Such officer may authorize a person 
inspecting to take short
notes (not verbatim in pencil.)
(4) The fees payable under this rule may 
be paid in a manner as
the Central Government may from time to 
time determine.
36.
 
Seal
 :-
The Custodian General and the Custodian shall 
have a seal which
will bear the words Custodian General/Custodian of 
Evacuee
Property.37.
 
Restitution
 :-
When any property taken into possession 
as an evacuee property is
subsequently declared by the Custodian or 
any other competent
authority to be a non-evacuee property, the 
Custodian may, on the
application of any party entitled to the 
actual possession thereof,
take such action as will place the 
parties in the same position in
which they were on the date of 
possession. For this purpose, the
Custodian may order the person in 
occupation of the property to
vacate the same and the Custodian may 
use such force or authorise
the use of such forces as may be 
necessary for the purpose.
38.
 
Receipts
 :-
Income and other receipts on account of 
Evacuee property fall
under the following categories: The head (C) 
is intended to cover
receipts like interest on investment of surplus 
cash by the
Custodian in approved Government securities under 
Section 10(2)
(p) of the Act and other receipts which may not be 
allocated to any
other head.
39.
 
Maintenance of records and registers
 :-
The following 
account records and registers shall be maintained by
Custodian of 
Evacuee Property or by Officers autho- rised to act on
their behalf.
(i) An index Register shall be 
maintained in Form No. 14 in which
the names of evacuees shall be 
entered in alphabetical order.
References to the pages of other 
registers in which the transactions
of the evacuee are recorded 
shall be given on the relevant page of
this-register.
(ii) A personal account shall be 
maintained in Form No. 15 for each
evacuee in a bound register, 
with an index in an alphabetical order.
Sufficient number of pages 
shall be set apart for each evacuee. The
monthly total of receipts 
payments as recorded in the several
individual registers shall be 
posted into the personal account of
each evacuee at the end of 
each month, figures of administration
charge and custodians fee 
being posted separately as distinct from
totals of other 
expenditure.(iii) A receipt and expenditure account 
of immoveable property
shall be maintained in Form No. 16 for 
recording complete details of
receipts and payments of all evacuee 
immoveable property other
than agricultural land, and it shall 
also show, the name of the
owner, full specifications of property 
and assessed rent recoverable
in respect of each item. Particulars 
of factories and work-shops shall
be. recorded in a separate 
register in the same form. A separate
account of receipts and 
expenditure shall be maintained in Form
No. 17 in respect of 
Agricultural property. The entries in the
registers shall be 
attested by the officer checking them.
(iv) Account of receipt and expenditure 
on account of moveable
property belonging to each evacuee shall be 
maintained in Form
No. 18. Separate registers shall be maintained 
in respect of
identifiable and unidentifiable property. Disposal 
of this property by
auction, sale or otherwise when made shall be 
indicated in this
register. The results of the verification of 
ground balances of the
articles with the book balances shall be 
recorded in this register.
When the property is sold or leased by 
public auction the bids shall
be recorded in the sales register 
(Form No. 19), the signature or
thumb impression of the last 
bidder being obtained in column 11 of
the form.
NOTE:- The intermediate bids in respect 
of property liable to fetch
not more than Rs. 100/- may not be 
recorded in the register.
(v) Account of receipt and expenditure 
in respect of debts or claims
due to evacuees shall be maintained 
in Form No. 20.
(vi) A rent demand and collection 
register for immoveable property
(other than Agricultural) shall 
be maintained in Form No. 21 for
showing the rent assessed on 
immoveable property let out on rent
and the amount of rent 
actually realised.
(vii) A miscellaneous demand and 
collection register shall be
maintained in Form No. 22 for 
recording recovery of amounts other
than those recorded in the 
Rent Demand and Collection Register.(viii) Income arising from the interest 
of evacuees in business
concerns, e.g. shares in business profits, 
shall be accounted for in a
register in Form No. 23.
(ix) In respect of agricultural land a 
register of demand and
collection shall be maintained in Form No. 
24. Demand in respect of
all items brought on to the property 
register for agricultural land
shall be recorded in this register, 
the name of evacuee owner, the
allottee and the monthly rent fixed 
for each item of property shall
also be shown therein. Demands, 
which will be collected by issue of
rent bills and the 
realisations effected, shall be noted in the
columns provided for 
the purpose.
(x) The Demand and Collection registers 
shall be reviewed and
closed at the end of each year and the 
outstanding balances shall
be struck and carried forward to the 
registers of the succeeding
year. A certificate to the effect that 
all recoverable demands of the
year have been noted in the 
registers and that the balances have
been correctly carried 
forward to the succeeding years registers
shall be recorded at the 
end of each register by a responsible
officer.
(xi) A statement showing demands to the 
end of the previous
month, recoveries made during the current 
month and the
outstanding balances shall be forwarded to the 
Ministry of
Rehabilitation, Government of India, through the 
Custodian-
General not later than the 15th day of the succeeding 
month and
causes of arrears if any and steps taken to clear them 
shall be
explained in the statement.
(xii) A cash book in Form No. 25 shall 
be maintained to show all
transactions of receipts and payments 
relating exclusively to
evacuee property. Amounts received or paid 
on account of evacuee
property shall be entered in the cash book 
on the date on which
they are received or paid. The cash book 
shall be closed daily and
the entries therein shall be checked and 
initialled daily by the
Custodian or an authorised Gazetted 
Officer. Cash in hand shall bedeposited promptly into the 
Treasury. The cash in hand shall be
verified at the end of each 
month by the Custodian or by any other
Gazetted Officer nominated 
by him for the purpose and he shall
record a signed and dated 
certificate to this effect in the cash book.
In addition, surprise 
checks shall be made frequently at irregular
intervals.
1
 [The Custodians will keep a separate 
account in Form No. 25-A of the amounts
deposited in the Treasury in 
favour of the Pay and Accounts Officer. A copy of this
account will be 
sent to the latter at the end of every month, duly verified by the
Treasury Officer. The figures appearing in this account shall be 
reconciled with
those of the Pay and Accounts Officer, monthly.]
1. Subs. by Notification S.O. 2102, dated 
25th September, 1958
40.
 
Personal deposit account to be closed
 :-
(1) The personal deposit accounts opened 
in the name of the
Custodian of Evacuee Property or other officer 
authorized by the
Government in this behalf for crediting receipts 
in respect of
unacquired evacuee properties shall be closed with 
effect from 1st
April, 1957, or such other date as may be 
prescribed. All receipts
on account of unacquired evacuee property 
shall thereafter be
(2) The receipts on account of 
sale-proceeds and other receipts of
unidentified evacuee moveable 
property and administration
charges/Custodians fee thereon shall 
also be credited into the
treasury in favour of the Pay and 
Accounts Officer, Ministry of
Rehabilitation, New Delhi, for 
credit under a distinct suspense head
"Sale-proceeds of 
unidentiFied evacuee moveable property"
subordinate to "Section 
S-Deposit and Advance-Part IV-Suspense,"
and "XLVI-Misc.-Central, 
etc." respectively. When such receipts are
credited into the 
treasury they shall be shown as credited to the
Pay and Accounts 
Officer, Ministry of Rehabilitation, New Delhi, to
whom a copy of 
the treasury challan (marked original) shall be
forwarded in 
advance to enable him to watch the credits.]
41.
 
Payments
 :-
Where repairs, etc. to evacuee property 
are carried out by thePublic Works Department, the Executive 
Engineer concerned shall
send a schedule in Form No. 26 showing the 
charges incurred by
him on such repairs etc. This charges shall be 
debited to the
account of the property of the evacuee owner 
concerned. Where,
however, the allottees in occupation of evacuee 
property are
permitted by the Custodian to carry out minor repairs 
and to set-off
the amount of expenditure actually incurred against 
the rent due,
the gross amount of the rent shall be entered in the 
relevant
Demand and Collection Register while the cost of repairs 
shall be
noted in the appropriate column in the account of the 
property of
the evacuee concerned.
42.
 
Omitted
 :-
Municipal and other taxes paid in respect 
of evacuee property shall
be debited to the account of the property 
of the evacuee
concerned.
43.
 
Payment by Custodian
 :-
(1) No payment shall be made except 
after the payee has
presented his claim and the Custodian or an 
officer duly authorized
by him in this behalf, after checking the 
same, has passed order of
payment thereon.
1
 [(2) 
After the personal deposit accounts in the name of the
Custodians 
have been closed as indicated in rule 40, all expenditure
for 
maintenance, repairs, and the like of unacquired evacuee
property 
and refund, if any, of the receipts, shall be drawn from
the Pay 
and Accounts Officer, Ministry of Rehabilitation, on
presentation 
of bills in accordance with the financial rules and
regulations as 
may be laid down by the Central Government. All
such charges shall 
be taken directly to the deposit to the head
"Transactions on 
account of unacquired evacuee property"
mentioned in rule 40.]
1. Subs. by Notification S.O. 2102, dated 
25th September, 1958.
44.
 
Monthly State,emt pf ad,omostratove cjarges
 :-At the 
close of each month. the Custodian will work out figures for
administration charges in Form No. 27 in respect of receipts
credited to the head mentioned in rule 40(1) and communicate
them to 
the Pay and Accounts Officer for carrying out necessary
adjustment 
in accounts by debiting the Deposit Head "S-Deposits
and Advances, 
etc. transactions on account of unacquired evacuee
property" per 
contra credit to "XLVI-Miscellaneous, Central" etc.
The monthly 
totals of "gross realizations" and "administration
charges/Custodians fee" as worked out in Form No. 25-A shall be
reconciled with the corresponding figures in the classified abstract
in Form No. 29.]
45.
 
Omitted
 :-
The total monthly debits and credits in 
each ledger account shall be
entered in a register in Form No. 28, 
any difference between the
total credits and debits as per this 
register shall be agreed with the
difference of total receipts and 
payments posted in the classified
abstract in respect of the deposit 
head.
Note:- A certificate that the balances 
in the Personal Ledger
Account of the evacuee have been reconciled 
with the cash in hand
plus the amount shown in the treasury column 
of the cash book
(vide rule 40 and with the classified abstract as 
provided above)
shall be submitted by the end of month following 
that to which the
accounts relate to the Ministry of 
Rehabilitation, Government of
India, through the Custodian- 
General.
46.
 
Record of payments
 :-
Each Custodian of evacuee 
property shall maintain a record of
payments claimed from the Pay 
and Accounts Officer, in Form No.
29. He shall also compile monthly 
a statement of expenditure in
Form No. 30 and send it to the 
Custodian-General-cum-Chief
Settlement Commissioner for 
reconciliation with the office of the
Pay and Accounts Officer, 
Ministry of Rehabilitation.]
47.
 
Omitted
 :-
XXX XXX XXX
48.
 
Omitted
 :-If a form different from that prescribed in 
these rules is used, the
prior approval of the Audit Officer who is 
responsible for the local
audit of the accounts shall be obtained.
49.
 
Repeal
 :-
The rules contained in the following 
notifications, namely :
(i) the Notification of the Government 
of Punjab in the Relief and
Rehabili- tation Department No. 8689-S 
(Rev.), dated the 29th
August, 1951 ; and
(ii) the notification of the Government 
of Patiala and East Punjab
States Union in the Rehabilitation 
Department No. 2, dated the
19th February, 1952, are hereby 
repealed: Provided that 
1
 [* * *
*.] 
anything done or any action taken in exercise of any power
conferred by any of the said rules shall be deemed to have been
done or taken under the corresponding provision of these rules.
5 [* * * *]
1. The Words "subject to the next 
succeeding proviso" omitted by
S.R.O. 1381, dated 4th August, 1952.
1
THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,  2012.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day of February, 2013.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS  TO THE INDIAN  PENAL CODE
2.  In the Indian Penal Code (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Penal Code),
in section 100, after clause Sixthly , the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“Seventhly .–– An act of throwing or administering acid or an attempt to throw
or administer acid which may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurtwill otherwise be the consequence of such act.".Short title andcommencement.
Amendment
of section100.45 of 1860.Bill No. 63 of 2013
5
10AS INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA2
Insertion of new
sections 166Aand 166B.3.  After section 166 of the Penal Code, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“166A. Whoever, being a public servant,––
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law which prohibits him
from requiring the attendance at any place of any person for the  purpose ofinvestigation into an offence or any other matter, or
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any other direction
of the law regulating the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation,or
(c) fails to record any information given to him under sub-section ( 1) of
section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in relation to cognizable
offence punishable under section 326A, section 326B, section 354, sub-sections
(2) and ( 3) of section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, sub-section ( 2) of
section  354D, section 370, section 370A, section  376, section  376A, section376B, section  376C, section  376D,  section  376E or section 509,
shall be punished  with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months but which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine.
166B. Whoever, being in char ge of a hospital, public or private, whether run by
the Central Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other person,contravenes the provisions of section 357C of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or withfine or with both.".
4.  In section 228A of the Penal Code, in sub-section ( 1), for the words, figures and
letters "offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section
376D", the words, figures and letters "offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B,
section 376C, section 376D or section 376E" shall be substituted.
5. After section 326 of the Penal Code, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
'326A. Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns or
maims or disfigures or disables,  any part or parts of the body of a person or causesgrievous hurt by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by usingany other means with the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely tocause such injury or hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descriptionfor a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonmentfor life, and with fine:
  Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses
of the treatment of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the
victim.
326B. Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to
administer acid to any person, or attempts to use any other means, with the intention ofcausing permanent or partial damage or deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement ordisability or grievous hurt to that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of eitherdescription for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to sevenyears, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1 .—For the purposes of  section  326A and  this section, "acid" includes
any substance which has acidic or corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable ofcausing  bodily injury leading  to scars or disfigurement  or temporary  or permanent disability.
Explanation  2.—  For  the  purposes  of  section 326A and this  section,  permanent  or
partial  damage or deformity shall not be required to be irreversible.'.Public servantdisobeyingdirectionunder law.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Amendment of
section 228A.Punishment
for non-treatment ofvictim.
Insertion of
new sections326A and326B.
Voluntarily
causinggrievous hurtby  use ofacid, etc.
Voluntarily
throwing orattempting tothrow acid.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
503
6.  In section 354 of the Penal Code, for the words "shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both", thewords "shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall notbe less than one year but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine" shallbe substituted.
7. After section 354 of the Penal Code, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
 '354A. ( 1) A man committing any of the following acts—
(i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual
overtures; or
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) showing pornography against the will of a woman; or
(iv) making sexually coloured remarks,
shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment.
(2) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) or
clause (iii) of sub-section ( 1) shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause ( iv) of sub-section ( 1)
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extendto one year, or with fine, or with both.
354B. Any man who assaults or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such
act with the intention of disrobing or compelling her to be naked in any public place,shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not beless than three years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable tofine.
354C. Any man who watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a
private act in circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of notbeing observed either by the perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of theperpetrator or disseminates such image shall be punished  on first  conviction  withimprisonment  of either description  for  a term which shall not be less than one year,but which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and be punishedon a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for aterm which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to seven years,and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purpose of this section, "private act" includes an act of
watching carried out in a place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably beexpected to provide privacy and where the victim's genitals, posterior or breasts areexposed or covered only in underwear; or the victim is using a lavatory; or the victimis doing a sexual act that is not of a kind ordinarily done in public.
Explanation 2.—Where the victim consents to the capture of the images or any
act, but not to their dissemination to third persons and where such image or act isdisseminated, such dissemination shall be considered an offence under this section.
354D. ( 1) Any man who—
(i) follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to
foster personal interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest bysuch woman; orAssault or useof criminalforce towoman withintent todisrobe.
V oyeurism.
Stalking.Insertion of
new sections354A, 354B,354C and354D.
Sexual
harassmentandpunishmentfor sexualharassment.Amendment
of section354.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
454
(ii) monitors the use by a woman of the internet, email or any other form
of electronic communication; or
(iii) watches or spies on a woman in any manner,
that results in a fear of violence or serious alarm or distress in the mind of such woman,
or interferes with the mental peace of the woman, commits the offence of stalking:
Provided  that such conduct shall not amount  to stalking  if the man who
pursued it proves that—
(i) it was pursued for the purpose of preventing  or detecting  crime  and
the man accused of stalking had been entrusted  with  the responsibility ofprevention and detection of crime by the State; or
(ii) it was pursued under any law or to comply with  any condition or
requirement imposed by any person under any law; or
(iii) in the particular circumstances  such conduct was reasonable and justified.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which mayextend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.’.
8. For section 370 of the Penal Code, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘370. ( 1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation, ( a) recruits, ( b) transports,
(c) harbours, ( d) transfers, or ( e) receives, a person or persons, by—
First .— using threats, or
Secondly. — using force, or any other form of coercion, or
Thirdly. — by abduction, or
Fourthly. — by practising  fraud, or deception, or
Fifthly. — by abuse of power, or
Sixthly .— by inducement, including the giving or receiving  of payments
or benefits,  in order to achieve  the consent of any person having control  overthe person recruited, transported, harboured, transferred or received,
commits the offence of trafficking.
Explanation  1.— The expression "exploitation" shall include any act of physical
exploitation or any form of sexual exploitation, slavery or practices similar to slavery,servitude, or the forced removal of organs.
Explanation  2.— The consent of the victim is immaterial in determination of the
offence of trafficking.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years, but which mayextend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a minor, it shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one minor, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than fourteen
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.Substitution of
new sections370 and 370Afor section370.
Trafficking of
person.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
455
(6)  If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of minor on more than one
occasion, then such person shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall meanimprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) When a public servant or a police officer is involved in the trafficking of any person
then, such public servant or police officer shall be punished with imprisonment for life, whichshall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liableto fine.
370A.  ( 1) Whoever, knowingly  or having   reason to believe  that a minor has been
trafficked,   engages  such minor  for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall  be punishedwith  rigorous  imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which mayextend to seven  years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, knowingly by or having  reason to believe  that a person has been
trafficked, engages such person for  sexual exploitation in any manner,  shall be punishedwith  rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which mayextend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.'.
9. For sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the Penal Code, the following
sections shall be substituted, namely:—
‘375.   A man  is said to commit "rape" if he—
 (a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth  urethra or
anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other  person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the
penis, into the vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so withhim or any other person; or
 (c)  manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration
into the vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her todo so with him or any other person; or
 (d)  applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes
her to do so with him or any other person,
under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions:—
First. —Against her will.
Secondly. —Without her consent.
Thirdly. —With her consent when her consent has been obtained by
putting her or any person in whom  she  is interested, in fear of death or ofhurt.
Fourthly. —With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her
husband and that her consent is given because she believes that he is anotherman to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly. —With her consent when, at the time of giving such consent,
by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration byhim personally or through another of any stupefying or unwholesomesubstance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences of thatto which she gives consent.Exploitationof a traffickedperson.
Substitution of
new sectionsfor sections375, 376,376A, 376B,376C and376D.
Rape.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
406
Sixthly. —With or without her consent, when she is under sixteen years
of age.
Seventhly .—When she is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, "vagina" shall also include
labia majora .
Explanation  2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when
the woman by words, gestures or any form of   verbal or non-verbal communication,communicates willingness to participate in the specific sexual act:
Provided that a woman who does not physically   resist to the act of penetration
shall not by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexualactivity.
Exception 1 .—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
Exception 2 .—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the
wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
376. ( 1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-section ( 2), commits
rape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a termwhich shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life,and shall also be liable to fine.
 (2)  Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer, commits rape—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which such police officer
is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or
(iii) on a  woman in such police officer's custody or in the custody
of a police officer subordinate to such police officer; or
(b) being a public servant, commits rape on a woman in such public
servant's custody or in the custody of a public servant subordinate to suchpublic servant; or
(c) being a member of the armed forces deployed in an area by the Central
or a State Government commits rape in such area; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other
place of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or ofa women's or children's institution, commits rape on any inmate of such jail,remand home, place or institution; or
(e) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits rape on
a  woman in that hospital; or
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in a position of
trust or authority towards the woman, commits rape on such woman; or
(g) commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or
(h) commits rape on a woman  knowing her to be pregnant; or
(i) commits rape on a woman when she is under  sixteen years of age;
orPunishmentfor rape.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
407
(j) commits rape, on a woman incapable of giving consent; or
(k) being in a position of control or dominance over a woman, commits rape
on such woman; or
(l) commits rape on a woman suffering from mental or physical disability; or
(m) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm or maims or
disfigures or endangers the life of a woman; or
(n) commits rape repeatedly on the same woman,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonmentfor the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) "armed forces" means the naval, military and  air  forces and  includes
any  member of  the Armed  Forces constituted under any law for the time beingin force, including the paramilitary forces and any auxiliary forces that are underthe control of the Central Government or the State Government;
(b) "hospital" means the precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts
of any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescenceor of persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation;
(c) "police officer" shall have the same meaning as assigned to the
expression "police" under the Police Act, 1861;
(d) "women's or children's institution" means an institution, whether called
an orphanage or a home for neglected women or children or a widow's home oran institution called by any other name, which is established and maintained forthe reception and care of women or children.
376A. Whoever, commits an offence punishable under sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section ( 2) of section 376 and in the course of such commission inflicts an injury which
causes the death of the woman or causes the woman to be in a persistent vegetativestate, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be lessthan twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall meanimprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, or with death.
376B. Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately,
whether under a decree of separation or otherwise, without her consent, shallbe punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be lessthan two years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation. —In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( d) of section 375.
376C. Whoever, being—
(a) in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship; or
(b) a public servant; or
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of
custody established by or under any law for the time being in force, or a women'sor children's institution; or
(d) on  the  management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital,
abuses such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or seduce any woman either in
his custody or under his charge or present in the premises to have sexual intercourse
with him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punishedwith rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less thanfive years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.5 of 1861.
Punishment
for causingdeath orresulting inpersistentvegetativestate ofvictim.
Sexual
intercourse byhusband uponhis wife duringseparation.
Sexual
intercourse bya person inauthority.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
458
Explanation  1.—In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( d) of section 375.
Explanation 2 . —For the purposes of this section, Explanation  1 to section 375
shall also be applicable.
Explanation 3 .—"Superintendent", in relation to a jail, remand home or other
place of custody or a women's or children's institution, includes a person holding anyother office in such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue of which suchperson can exercise any authority or control over its inmates.
Explanation  4.—The expressions "hospital" and "women's or children's
institution" shall respectively have the same meaning as in Explanation  to sub-section
(2) of section 376.
376D. Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or
acting in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be  deemed tohave committed the offence of rape and shall be punished with  rigorous imprisonmentfor a term which  shall  not be less  than twenty  years, but which may extend to lifewhich shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and withfine:
  Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses
and rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the
victim.
376E. Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence punishable under
section 376 or section 376A or section 376D and is subsequently convicted of anoffence punishable under any of the said sections shall be punished with imprisonmentfor life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, orwith death.'.
10. In section 509 of the Penal Code, for the words "shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both", the words"shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, andalso with fine" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS  TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE , 1973.
11. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as
the Code of Criminal Procedure), in section 26, in the proviso to clause ( a), for the words,
figures and letters "offence under section 376 and sections 376A to 376D of the IndianPenal Code", the words, figures and letters "offence under section 376, section 376A,section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code" shallbe substituted.
12.  In  section 54A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the following provisos shall be
inserted, namely:—
 "Provided that, if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or
physically disabled, such process of  identification  shall  take place  under  thesupervision of a Judicial Magistrate  who shall  take appropriate  steps to ensure thatsuch person identifies  the person arrested using methods that person is comfortablewith:Gang rape.
Punishment
for repeatoffenders.
Amendment
of section509.
Amendment
of section 26.2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section54A.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
459
Provided further that if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or
physically disabled, the identification process shall be videographed.".
13. In section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section ( 1), the following
provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an offence
under section 326A, section 326B, section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section354C, section 354D, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section376D, section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code is alleged to have beencommitted or attempted, then such information shall be recorded, by a woman policeofficer or any woman officer:
Provided further that—
(a) in the event that the person against whom  an offence under section  354,
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, section 376A,section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376E or section 509 of the IndianPenal Code is alleged to have been committed or attempted, is temporarily orpermanently mentally or physically disabled, then such information shall berecorded by a police officer, at the residence of the person seeking to report suchoffence or at a convenient place of such person's choice, in the presence of aninterpreter or a special educator, as the case may be;
(b)  the recording of such information shall be videographed;
(c) the police  officer  shall  get the statement of  the person recorded by  a
Judicial Magistrate under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 5A) of section 164 as soon
as possible.".
14.  In section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section ( 1), in the proviso,
for the words "under the age of fifteen years or woman", the words "under the age of fifteenyears or above the age of sixty-five years or a woman or a mentally or physically disabledperson" shall be substituted.
15. In section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section ( 3), after the
proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under
section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376,section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376E or section 509 ofthe Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be recorded,by a woman police officer or any woman officer.".
16. In section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, after sub-section ( 5), the following
sub-section  shall be inserted, namely:—
 "(5A) (a)  In  cases  punishable  under  section  354, section  354A, section 354B,
section 354C, section 354D, sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section  376, section
376A, section  376B, section  376C, section 376D, section 376E or section 509 of theIndian Penal Code, the Judicial Magistrate shall record the statement of the personagainst whom such offence has been committed in the manner prescribed in sub-section(5), as soon as the commission of the offence is brought to the notice of the police:
Provided that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently
mentally or physically disabled, the Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreteror a special educator in recording the statement:
Provided further that if the person making the statement is temporarily or
permanently mentally or physically disabled, the statement made by the person, withthe assistance of an interpreter or a special educator, shall be videographed.Amendmentof section160.
Amendment
of section161.45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section164.45 of 1860.Amendment
of section154.
45 of 1860.45 of 1860.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4510
(b)  A statement recorded under clause ( a) of a person, who is temporarily or
permanently mentally or physically disabled, shall be considered a statement in lieu ofexamination-in-chief, as specified in section 137 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 suchthat the maker of the statement can be cross-examined on such statement, without theneed for recording the same at the time of trial.".
17. In section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section ( 2), in sub-clause ( h) of
clause ( i), for the words, figures and letter "or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code", the words,
figures and letters "section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code" shall be substituted.
18. In section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, after sub-section ( 1), the following
Explanation  shall be inserted, namely:—
"Explanation.— For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that no sanction
shall be required in case of a public servant accused of any offence alleged to havebeen committed under section 166A, section 166B, section 354, section 354A, section354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 370, section 375, section 376, section 376A,section 376C, section 376D or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code.".
19. After section 198A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
"198B. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section
376B of the Indian Penal Code where the persons are in a marital relationship, exceptupon prima facie satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a complaint
having been filed or made by the wife against the husband.".
20. In section 273 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, before the Explanation , the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that where the evidence of a woman below the age of eighteen years who
is alleged to have been subjected to rape or any other sexual offence, is to be recorded, thecourt may take appropriate measures to ensure that such woman is not confronted by theaccused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross-examination of the accused.".
21. In section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, for sub-section ( 1), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) In every inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be continued from day-to-day until
all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the adjournment
of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded:
Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 376,
section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code, theinquiry or trial shall, as far as possible be completed within a period of two months fromthe date of filing of the charge sheet.".
22.  In section 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section ( 2), for the words,
figures and letter "or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code", the words, figures and letters"section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code" shall be substituted.
23. After section 357A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
"357B. The compensation payable by the State Government under section 357A
shall be in addition to the payment of fine to the victim under section 326A or section376D of the Indian Penal Code.
"357C. All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government,
the State Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately, provide thefirst-aid or medical treatment, free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered undersection 326A, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code,and shall immediately inform the police of such incident.".Insertion of
new section
198B.1 of 1872.
Amendment
of section173.
Amendment
of section273.Cognizance of
offence. 45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section309.
Amendment
of section327.45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
Insertion of
new sections357B and 357C.
Treatment of
victims.
45 of 1860.Amendment
of section197.
45 of 1860.
Compensation
to be in additionto fine undersection 326A orsection 376D ofIndian PenalCode.45 of 1860.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4511
24. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, under the heading
"1.-OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE",—
(a) after the entries relating to section 166, the following entries shall be inserted,
namely:—
1        2      3    4    5 6
"166A Public servant Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Magistrate of the
disobeying for minimum first class
direction under 6 months
law which may
extend to 2
years and fine
166B Non-treatment Imprisonment Non- Bailable Magistrate
of victim by for 1 year or cognizable of the first
hospital fine or both  class";
(b) after the entries relating to section 326, the following entries shall be inserted,
namely:—
1        2      3    4    5 6
"326A V oluntarily Imprisonment for Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session
causing not less than 10
grievous hurt years but which
by use of may extend to
acid, etc. imprisonment for
life and fine to be
paid to the victim.
326B V oluntarily Imprisonment for Cognizable Non- Court of
throwing or 5 years but which bailable Session.";
attempting to may extend to 7
throw acid. years and with fine.
(c)  for the entries relating to section 354, the following entries shall be substituted,
namely:—
1        2      3    4    5 6
‘‘354 Assault or use Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Any Magistrate
of criminal 1 year which may bailable
force to woman extend to 5 years,with intent to and with fine.
outrage her
modesty.
354A Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate
harassment of which may extend
the nature of to 3 years or with
unwelcome fine or with both.
physical contact
and advances ora demand or
request for sexual
favours.
Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate
harassment of which may extend
the nature of to 1 year or with
making sexually fine or with both.coloured remark
or showing
pornography orany other
unwelcome
physical, verbalor non-verbal
conduct of sexual
nature.Amendment
of FirstSchedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
5512
1 234 5 6
354B Assault or use of Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Any Magistrate
criminal force to not less than bailable
woman with intent 5 years but which
to disrobe. may extend to
10 years andwith fine.
354C V oyeurism. Imprisonment of Cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate
not less than1 year but whichmay extend to3 years and withfine for firstconviction.
Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Any Magistrate
not less than bailable
3 years but whichmay extend to7 years and withfine for secondor subsequent
conviction.
354D Stalking. Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Any Magistrate.".
not less than bailable
1 year but whichmay extend to5 years and with
fine.
(d) for the entries  relating to section 370, the following entries shall be substituted,
namely:—
1 234 5 6
‘‘370 Trafficking Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of Session
of person. not less than bailable
7 years but which
may extend to10 years and with
fine.
Trafficking Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of Session
of more than not less than bailable
one person. 10 years but which
may extend to
imprisonment forlife and with fine.
Trafficking Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of Session
of a minor. not less than bailable
10 years but whichmay extend to
imprisonment for
life and with fine.
Trafficking Imprisonment of Cognizable Non- Court of Session
of more than not less than bailable
one minor. 14 years but which
may extend toimprisonment for
life and with fine.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
5513
Public servant Imprisonment for Cognizable Non- bailable Court of Session
or a police officer life which shall
involved in mean the
trafficking of remainder of thatminor. person’s natural
life and with fine.
Person Imprisonment for Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session
convicted of life which shall
offence of mean thetrafficking of remainder of that
minor on more person’s natural
than one occasion. life and with fine.
370A Exploitation Imprisonment of Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session
of a trafficked not less thanchild. 5 years but which
may extend to
7 years and withfine.
Exploitation Imprisonment of Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session";
of a trafficked not less than
adult person. 3 years but which
may extend to5 years and with
fine.
(e) for the entries relating to sections 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D, the
following entries shall be substituted, namely:—
1 234 5 6
‘‘376 Rape Rigorous Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session
imprisonment of
not less than
7 years but whichmay extend toimprisonment
for life and with
fine.
Rape Rigorous Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session
by a police officer imprisonment of
or a public servant not less than
or member of 10 years but
armed forces or which may extenda person being on to imprisonment
the management for life which
or on the staff shall mean theof a jail, remand remainder of that
home or other person’s natural
place of custody life and with fine.
or women’s orchildren’sinstitution or
by a person on
the managementor on the staffof a hospital,
and rape
committed bya person in aposition of
trust or authority
towards the personraped or by anear relative of
the person
raped.1 234 5 6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50556014
1 234 5 6
376A Person committing Rigorous Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session
an offence of imprisonment of
rape not less than
and inflicting 20 years but
injury which which may extend
causes death or to imprisonment
causes the woman for life which
to be in a persistent shall mean
vegetative state. imprisonment
for the
remainder of
that person'snatural life orwith death.
376B Sexual intercourse Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Court of Session
by husband upon for not less than (only on
his wife 2 years but the complaint
during which may of the victim)
separation. extend to 7
years and withfine
376C Sexual Rigorous Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session.
intercourse by imprisonment
a person in for not less than
authority. 5 years but which
may extend to
10 years and
with fine.
376D Gang rape Rigorous Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session
imprisonmentfor not less than20 years but
which may
extend toimprisonmentfor life which
shall mean
imprisonment forthe remainderof that person's
natural life and with
fine to be paid tothe victim.
376E Repeat offenders. Imprisonment Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session.";
for life which
shall meanimprisonmentfor the
remainder of
that person’snatural life or
with death.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5015
(f) entry relating to section 509, in column 3, for the words "Simple imprisonment
for one year, or fine, or both,", the words and figure "Simple imprisonment for 3 years
and with fine " shall be substituted.
CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENTS  TO THE INDIAN  EVIDENCE  ACT, 1872
25. After section 53 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereafter in this Chapter referred
to as the Evidence Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
  "53A. In a prosecution for an offence under section  354, section  354A, section
354B, section  354C, section 354D, section  376, section  376A, section  376B, section
376C, section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit
any such offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of the characterof the victim or of such person's previous sexual experience with any person shall not
be relevant on the issue of such consent or the quality of consent.".
26. For section 114A of the Evidence Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
 '114A.  In a prosecution for rape under clause ( a), clause ( b), clause ( c),
clause ( d), clause ( e), clause ( f), clause ( g), clause ( h), clause ( i), clause ( j), clause ( k),
clause ( l), clause ( m) or clause ( n) of sub-section ( 2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal
Code, where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whetherit was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and such woman
states in her evidence before the court that she did not consent, the court shall presume
that she did not consent.
Explanation. — In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses ( a) to ( d) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.'.
27. For section  119  of the Evidence Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
 "119. A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other
manner in which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writingmust be written and the signs made in open Court, evidence so given shall be deemed
to be oral evidence:
 Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall
take the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement,
and such statement shall be videographed.".
28. In section 146 of the Evidence Act, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under of section 376,  section
376A, section 376B, section 376C,  section 376D or section 376E of the Indian PenalCode or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of consent is an
issue, it shall not be permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-
examination of the victim as to the general immoral character, or previous sexualexperience, of such victim with any person for proving such consent or the quality of
consent.".45 of 1860.1 of 1872. Insertion of
new section53A.
Evidence of
character orprevioussexualexperiencenot relevantin certaincases.
Substitution
of newsection forsection114A.
Presumption
as to absenceof consent incertainprosecutionfor rape.45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
Witness
unable tocommunicateverbally.Substitution
of newsection forsection 119.
Amendment
of section146.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4016
CHAPTER V
AMENDMENT  TO THE PROTECTION  OF CHILDREN  FROM  SEXUAL  OFFENCES  ACT, 2012
29. In section 2 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter
in this Chapter referred to as the Protection of Children Act), in sub-section (1), in clause (d),
for the words “eighteen years”, the words “sixteen years” shall be substituted.
30. For section 42 of the Proteciton of Children Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“42. Where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act
and also under sections 166A, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D, 370, 370A, 375, 376, 376A,376C, 376D, 376E or seciton 509 of the Indian Penal Code, then, notwithstandinganything contained in any law for the time being in force, the offender found guilty ofsuch offence shall be liable to punishment under this Act or under the Indian PenalCode as provides for punishment which is greater in degree.
42A. The provisions of this Act shall be in additon to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of anyinconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the provisionsof any such law to the extent of the inconsistency.”.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
31.  (1) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Indian
Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, asamended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of those Acts, as amended by this Act.Repeal and
saving.Ord. 3 of
2013.
45 of 1960.
2 of 1974.1 of 1872.Amendment
of section 2.
Substitution
of section 42.32 of 2012.
Alternate
punishment.
Act not in
derogation ofany other law.5
10
15
20STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 4th
December, 2012 in order to provide for stringent punishment for crimes against women, asalso to provide for more victim friendly procedures in the trials of such cases. After thehorrendous incident of gang rape, which occurred on 16th December, 2012 in Delhi, aCommittee, headed by Justice J. S. Verma was set up to make recommendations on amendingthe various laws to provide for speedy justice and enhanced punishment for offenders incases of sexual assault of extreme nature. The Justice Verme Committee submitted its Reporton 23rd January, 2013.
2. It was felt necessary to bring the revised laws into effect as soon as possible, as any
crime against women committed during the period when the law is in making will be punishableonly under the existing laws. In view of the urgency of the matter, the Criminal Law(Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 was promulgated on 3rd February, 2013.
3. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs examined
the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and tabled its Report in Parliament on 1st March,2013. Keeping in view the recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary StandingCommittee on Home Affairs, the recommendations of Justice Verma Committee and the viewsand comments received from various quarters including women groups, the Governmenthave drafted the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
4. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2103 seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code,
1860,  the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and the Protection ofChildren from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. These amendments seek to:—
(a) make specific provisions for punishment for the offences of causing grievous
hurt by acid attack and also for an attempt thereof;
(b) define and prescribe punishment for the offences of stalking, voyeurism and
sexual harassment;
(c) widen the definition of rape; broaden the ambit of aggravated rape; and
enhance the punishment thereof;
(d) prescribe for punishment extending to the sentence of death, for an offence
where in the course of commission of an offence of rape, the offender inflicts anyinjury which causes the death  of the victim or causes the victim to be in a persistentvegetative state;
(e) punish the repeat offenders of rape with imprisonment for life (which shall
mean the remainder of the person’s natural life), or with death;
(f) prescribe that those convicted for the offence of gang rape shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a minimum of twenty years extendable to life (whichshall mean the remainder of that person’s natural life) and fine; to be paid to the victimto meet the medical expenses;
(g) enhance punishment under sections  354 and 509 of Indian Penal Code;
(h) amend sections 54-A, 154, 160, 161, 164, 198-B, 273, 309  and 327 of the Code
of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 for providing for women friendly procedures; greatersensitivity to the requirement of physically and mentally disabled persons, under-aged children and old persons in the course of investigation and trial; for speedy trialof rape cases, and better recording of evidence;
1718
(i) provide that all hospitals shall immediately provide first aid and/or medical
treatment, free of cost, to the victims of acid attack or rape; and provide for punishmentfor contravention thereof;
(j) provide that the compensation payable by the State shall be in addition to the
payment of fine to the victim;
(k) amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 by way of inserting sections 53A,
114A, substitution of  section 119 and amendment of section 146 to protect the dignityof women;
(l) amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 so as to
harmonise the said Act with the provisions of the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL  KUMAR  SHINDE.
The 15th March, 2013.ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE INDIAN  PENAL CODE
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
100.  The  right of private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions mentioned
in the last preceding section, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to theassailant, if the offence which occasions the exercise of  the right be of any of the descriptionshereinafter enumerated, namely:—
* * * * *
228A.   (1) Whoever prints or publishes the name or any matter which may make known
the identity of any person against whom an offence under section 376, section 376A, section376B, section 376C or section 376D is alleged or found to have been committed (hererafter inthis section referred to as the victim) shall be punished with imprisonment of either descriptionfor a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *354. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished withimprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, orwith both.
* * * * *
370. Whoever imports, exports, removes, buys, sells or disposes of any person as a
slave, or accepts, receives or detains against his will any person as a slave, shall be punishedwith imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shallalso be liable to fine.
* * * * *
‘Sexual offences
375. A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has
sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six followingdescriptions:—
First. —Against her will.
Secondly. —Without her consent.
Thirdly. —With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or
any person in whom she is interested in fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly. —With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband, and
that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is orbelieves herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly. —With her consent, when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of
unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or throughanother of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand thenature and consequences of that to which she gives consent.
Sixthly. —With or without her consent, when she is under sixteen years of age.
Explanation.— Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse necessary
to the offence of rape.
Exception. —Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under
fifteen years of age, is not rape.
376. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by sub-section ( 2), commits rape
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be lessthan seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten years andAssault orcriminal forceto womanwith intent tooutrage hermodesty.
Punishment
for rape.Buying or
disposing ofany person asa slave.
Rape.
19When the right
of privatedefence of thebody extendsto causingdeaths.
Disclosure
of Identityof thevictim ofcertainofences, etc.20
shall also be liable to fine unless the woman raped is his own wife and is not under twelve
years of age, in which case, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer commits rape—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which he is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether or not situated in the
police station to which he is appointed; or
(iii) on a woman in his custody or in the custody of a police officer
subordinate to him; or
(b) being a public servant, takes advantage of his official position and commits
rape on a woman in his custody as such public servant or in the custody of a publicservant subordinate to him; or
(c) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place
of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women'sor children's institution takes advantage of his official position and commits rape onany inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, takes advantage of his
official position and commits rape on a woman in that hospital; or
(e) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
(f) commits rape on a woman when she is under twelve years of age; or
(g) commits gang rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
ten years but which may be for life and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgm ent, impose a sentence of imprisonment of either description for a term of less than ten years.
Explanation 1.—Where a woman is raped by one or more in a group of persons acting
in furtherance of their common intention, each of the persons shall be deemed to have
committed gang rape within the meaning of this sub-section.
Explanation 2.—"women's or children's institution" means an institution, whether
called an orphanage or a home for neglected women or children or a widows' home or by any
other name, which is established and maintained for the reception and care of women orchildren.
Explanation 3.—"hospital" means the precincts of the hospital and includes the
precincts of any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescenceor of persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation.
376A. Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately
from him under a decree of separation or under any custom or usage without her consentshall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years and shall also be liable to fine.
376B. Whoever, being a public servant, takes advantage of his official position and
induces or seduces, any woman, who is in his custody as such public servant or in the
custody of a public servant subordinate to him, to have sexual intercourse with him, such
sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with imprisonmentof either description for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
376C. Whoever, being the superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other
place of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women'sor children's institution takes advantage of his official position and induces or seduces anyIntercourse bya man with hiswife duringseparation.
Intercourse by
public servantwith woman inhis custody.
Intercourse by
superintendentof jail, remandhome, etc.21
female inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution to have sexual intercourse with
him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished withimprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—"superintendent" in relation to a jail, remand home or other place of
custody or a women's or children's institution includes a person holding any other office in
such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue of which he can exercise any authority
or control over its inmates.
Explanation 2.—The expression "women's or children's institution" shall have the
same meaning as in Explanation 2 to sub-section ( 2) of section 376.
376D.  Whoever, being on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a
hospital takes advantage of his position and has sexual intercourse with any woman in that
hospital, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punishedwith imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and shall
also be liable to fine.
Explanation.— The expression "hospital" shall have the same meaning as in
Explanation 3 to sub-section ( 2) of section 376.
* * * * *509. Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any word, makes
any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, intending that such word or sound shall be
heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the
privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which mayextend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
————
E
XTRACTS  FROM  THE CODE OF CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE , 1973
(2 OF 1974)
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
POWER  OF COURTS
26.  Subject to the other provisions of this Code,—
(a) any offence under the Indian Penal Code may be tried by—
(i) the High Court,  or
(ii) the Court of Session, or
(iii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule
to be triable:
Provided that any offence under section 376 and sections 376A to 376D of the
Indian Penal Code shall be tried as far as practicable by a Court presided over by a woman.
* * * * *54A. Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence and his
identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of
investigation of such offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the
officer in charge of a police station, direct the person so arrested to subject himself toidentification by any person or persons in such manner as the Court may deem fit.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XII
I
NFORMATION  TO THE POLICE  AND THEIR  POWERS  TO INVESTIGATE
154. (1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given
orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under
his direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given45 of 1860.Intercourse
by anymember ofthemanagementor staff of ahospital withany woman inthat hospital.
Word, gesture
or actintended toinsult themodesty of awoman.
Identification
of personarrested.
Information
in cognizablecases.Courts by
which offencesare triable. 45 of 1860.22
in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the
substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the
State Government may prescribe in this behalf.
* * * * *160. (1) Any police officer, making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order
in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits of hisown or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to beacquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as sorequired:
Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or woman shall be required
to attend at any place other than the place in which such male person or woman resides.
* * *  * *
161. (1) * * *  * *
(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course
of an examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and truerecord of the statement of each such person whose statement he records:
Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-
video electronic means.
* * *  * *
173. (1)* * *  * *
(2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall
forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, areport in the form prescribed by the State Government, stating—
* * *  * *
(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached
where investigation relates to an offence under section 376, 376A, 376B, 376C or 376Dof the Indian Penal Code.
* * *  * *
273. Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in the course of the
trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the accused, or, when his personalattendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader.
Explanation.— In this section, "accused" includes a person in relation to whom any
proceeding under Chapter VIII has been commenced under this Code.
* * * * *
309. (1) In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as
possible, and in particular, when the examination of witnesses has once begun, the sameshall be continued from day to day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined,unless the Court finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessaryfor reasons to be recorded:
Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under
sections 376 to 376D of the Indian Penal Code, the inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible, becompleted within a period of two months from the date of commencement of the examinationof  witnesses.
* * * * *
327. (1)* * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the inquiry into and trial of
rape or an offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section376D of the Indian Penal Code shall be conducted in camera :
Provided that the presiding judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an application made by
either of the parties, allow any particular person to have access to, or be or remain in, theroom on building used by the Court.
* * * * *Evidence to
be taken inpresence ofaccused.
Court to be
open.45 of 1860.
Power to
postpone oradjournproceedings.
45 of 1860.Police
officer'spower torequireattendance ofwitnesses.
Examination
of witnessesby police.
Report of
police officeroncompletionofinvestigation.
45 of 1860.23
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES
* * * * *
I.—OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
Section Offence Punishment Cognizable Bailable or By what Court
or non- non-bailable triable
coganizable
12 3 4 5 6
* * * * *
354 Assault or use of criminal Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any
force to a woman with for 2 years, or Magistrate.
intent to outrage her fine, or both.modesty.
* * * * *
370 Buying or disposing Imprisonment Non- Bailable M agistrate
of any person as a for 7 years cognizable of the first
slave. and fine. class.
* * * * *
376 Rape. Imprisonment for life Cognizable Non- Court of
or imprisonment for bailable Session.
ten years and fine.
Intercourse by a man with Imprisonment for two Non- Bailable Ditto.
his wife not being under years, or fine, or both. cognizable
twelve years of age.
376A Intercourse by a man with imprisonment for two Ditto Ditto Ditto.
his wife during separation. years and fine.
376B Intercourse by public Imprisonment for Cognizable Ditto Ditto.
servant with woman in his five years and fine. (but no arrest
custody. shall  be made
without a warrantor without an orderof a Magistrate).
376C Intercourse by super- Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto.
intendent of jail, remandhome, etc.
376D Intercourse by manager, Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto.
etc., of a hospital with anywoman in that hospital.
* * * * *
CHAPTER  XXII.—C RIMINAL  INTIMIDA TION , INSULT  AND ANNOYANCE
* * * * *
509 Uttering any word or Simple Cognizable Bailable Any
making any gesture imprisonment Magistrate.
intended to insult for 1 year, orthe modesty of a fine, or both.woman, etc.
* * * * *45 of 1860.24
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE INDIAN  EVIDENCE  ACT, 1872
( 1 OF 1872)
* * * * *114A.  In a prosecution for rape under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d)
or clause ( e) or clause ( g) of sub-section ( 2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where
sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether it was without theconsent of the woman alleged to have been raped and she states in her evidence before theCourt that she did not consent, the Court shall presume that she did not consent.
* * * * *119. A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other manner in
which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be writtenand the signs made in open Court. Evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral evidence.
* * * * *146. When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in addition to the questions herein-
before referred to, be asked any questions which tend—
(1) to test his veracity,
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in life, or
(3) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although the answer to such
questions might tend directly or indirectly to criminate him or might expose or tenddirectly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture:
Provided that in a prosecution for rape or attempt to commit rape, it shall not be
permissible to put questions in the cross-examination of the prosecutrix as to her generalimmoral character.
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACTS  FROM  THE PROTECTION  OF CHILDEREN  FROM  SEXUAL  OFFENCES  ACT, 2012
( 32 OF 2012)
* * * * *2.  (1)  In this Act, unless the context otherwise reqires,—
* * * * *
(d) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years;
* * * * *42.  Where an act or omission constitute an offence punishable under this Act and
also under any other law for the time being in force, then, notwithstanding any thing containedin any law for the time being in force, the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liableto punishment only under such law or this Act as provides for punishment which is greaterin degree.
* * * * *Presumption
as to absenceof consent incertainprosecutionsfor rape.
Questions
lawful incross-examination.Dumb
witnesses.45 of 1860.
Definitions.
Alternative
punishment.LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
furthr to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of Home Affairs )
GMGIPMRND—5787LS—15-03-2013. 

1 
 THE FAMILY COURTS ACT, 1984  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
FAMILY  COURTS  
3. Establishment of Family Courts . 
4. Appointment of Judges . 
5. Association of social welfare agencies, etc . 
6. Counsellors, officers and other employees of Family Courts . 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION  
7. Jurisdiction . 
8. Exclusion of jurisdiction and pending proceedings . 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
9. Duty of Family Court to make efforts for settlement . 
10. Procedure  generally . 
11. Proceedings to be held in camera . 
12. Assistance of medical and welfare experts . 
13. Right to legal representation . 
14. Application of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 . 
15. Record of oral evidence.  
16. Evidence of formal character on affidavit . 
17. Judgment . 
18. Execution of decrees and orders . 
CHAPTER V  
APPEALS AND REVISIONS  
19. Appeal . 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Act to have overriding effect . 
21. Power of High Court to make rules . 
22. Power of the Central Government to make rules . 
23. Power of the State Government to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE FAMILY  COURTS ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1984  
[14th September , 1984 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of Family Courts with a view to promote conciliation in, 
and secure speedy settlement of , disputes relating to marriage and family affairs and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Family Courts Act, 
1984.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for diffe rent States.  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” Omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020,  vide notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).  
2. This Act shall come into force in — 
(i)Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands  on 19th November , 1986, vide notification  No. 79/22/86, dated 19th 
November, 1986, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 1.  
(ii) Madhya Pradesh  on 19 thNovember , 1986, vide notification No. 79/6/86, dated 14th November, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 1.  
(iii) Uttar Pradesh  on 2ndOctober , 1986, vide notification No. 79/11/86 -Jus., dated 4th September, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Pt. II, Section 1.  
(iv)Delhi o n 19th November, 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 863(E), dater 18th November, 1986, Gazette of India, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(v)Maharashtra  on 1 stDecember , 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 944 (E), dated 5th December, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 3( ii). 
(vi)Karnataka  on 25 thMay , 1987, vide notification  No. G.S.R. 68 5(E), dated 15th May, 1987, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3( i). 
(vii)Orissa  on 1 st May, 1989, vide notification No. S.O. 321 (E), dated 27th April, 1989, Gazette of India, Extra, Pt. II, 
Section 3( ii). 
(viii)Kerala  on 21st October , 1989, vide notification No. 79/5/86, dated 17th October, 1989, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 1 . 
(ix)Goa on 16 thApril , 1990, vide notification No. S.O. 328(E), dated 12th April, 1990, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3( ii). 
(x)Union t erritory of Pondicherry  on 1st May, 1987, vide notification No. G.S.R. 459 (E), dated 29th April , 1987, Gazette of 
India, Extra , Pt. II, Section 3( i). 
(xi)West Bengal  on 1stNovember , 1991, vide notification No. 79/12/86 -Jus., dated 1st November, 1991, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 1  (E). 
(xii)Assam  on 2nd October , 1991, vide notification No. 79/2/86 Jus., dated 30th November, 1991, Gazette of India, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 1  (E). 
(xiii)Bihar  on 10th December , 1991, vide notification  No. S.O. 838(E), dated 6th December, 1991, Gazette of India, Extra. , 
Pt. II, Section 3( ii). 
(xiv)Manipur  on 3rdFebruary , 1992, vide notification  No. S.O. 91(E), dated 30th January, 1992, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. 
II, Section 3( ii). 
(xv)Haryana  on 2ndNovember , 1992, vide notification  No. S.O. 784(E), dated 2 3th October, 1992, Gazette of Ind ia, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3( i). 
(xvi)Andhra Pradesh  on 15 thFebruary , 1995, vide notification  No. S.O. 92 (E), dated 6 th February, 1995, Gazette of India, 
Extra .. Part II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(xvii) Gujarat  on 1stJanuary , 2000, vide notification No. S.O. 1268 (E), dated 2 0nd December, 1999, Gazette of India,  Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(xviii)Union territory of Daman and Diu on 10 th October , 2003, vide notification No. S.O. 1161 (E), dated 1 4th October, 
2003, Gazette of India , Extra., Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 3 
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Judge ” means the Judge or, as the case may be, the Principal Judge, Additional Principal 
Judge or other Judge  of a Family Court;  
(b) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “Family Court ” means a Family Court established under section 3;  
(e) all other words and expressions used but not defined in this A ct and defined in the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Code.  
  CHAPTER II  
FAMILY  COURTS  
 3. Establishment of Family Courts .—(1) For the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and powers 
conferred on a Family Court by this Act, the State Government, after consultation with the Hi gh Court, 
and by notification, — 
(a) shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, established for every area in the 
State comprising of city or town whose population excee ds one million, a Family Court;  
(b) may establish Family Courts for such other areas in the State as it may deem necessary.  
(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, specify, by notification, the 
local  limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of a Family Court shall extend and may, at any time, 
increase, reduce or alter such limits.   
4. Appointment of Judges .—(1) The State Government may, with the concurrence of the High 
Court, appoint one or more persons to be the Judge or Judges of a Family Court.  
(2) When a Family Court co nsists of more than one Judge, — 
(a) each  of the Judges may exercise all or any of the powers conferred on the Court by this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force;  
(b) the State Government may, with the concurrence of the High Court, appoint any of the Judges 
to be the Principal Judge and any other Judge to be the Additional Principal Judge;  
(c) the Principal Judge may, from time to time, make such arrangements as he may deem fit for 
the distribution of the  business of the Court among the various Judges thereof;   
(d) the Additional Prin cipal Judge may exercise the powers of the Principal Judge in the event of 
any vacancy in the office of the Principal Judge or when the Principal Judge is unable to discharge his 
functions owing to absenc e,  illness or any other cause.  
(3) A person shall n ot be qualified for ap pointment as a Judge unless he — 
(a) has for at least seven years held a judicial office in India or the office of a Member of a 
Tribunal or any post under the Union or a State requiri ng special knowledge of law; or  
(b) has for at leas t seven years been an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in 
succession; or  
(c) possesses such other qualifications as the Central Government may, with the concurrence of 
the Chief Justice of  India, prescribe.  4 
 (4) In selecting person s for appointment as Judges, — 
(a) every endeavour shall be made to ensure that persons committed to the need to protect and 
preserve the institution of marriage and to promote the welfare of children and qualified by reason of 
their experience and expertise to promote  the settlement of disputes by conciliation an d counselling 
are selected; and  
(b) preference shall be given to women.  
(5) No person shall be appointed as, or hold the office of, a Judge of a Family Court after he has 
attained the age of sixty -two years.  
(6) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of , a Judge shall be such as the State Government may, in consultation with the High Court, 
prescribe.  
5. Association of social welfare agen cies, etc.—The State Government may, in consultation with the 
High Court, provide, by rules, for the association, in such manner and for such purposes and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the  rules, with a Family Court of — 
(a) institutions  or organisations engaged in social welfare or the representatives thereof;  
(b) persons professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the family;  
(c) persons working in the field of social welfare; and  
(d) any other person whose association with a Fam ily Court would enable it to exercise its 
jurisdiction more effectively in accordance with the purposes of this Act.  
6. Counsellors, officers and other employees of Family Courts .—(1) The State Government shall , 
in consultation with the High Court, determi ne the number and categories of counsellors, officers and 
other employees required to assist a Family Court in the discharge of its functions and provide the Family 
Court with such counsellors, officers and other employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The term s and conditions of association of the counsellors and the terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be such as may be specif ied 
by rules made by the State G overnment.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION  
7. Jurisdiction .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Family Court shall — 
(a) have and exercise all the jurisdiction exercisable by any district court or any subordinate civil 
court under any law for the time being in force in res pect of suits and proceedings of the nature 
referred to in the Explanation ; and  
(b) be deemed, for the purposes of exercising such jurisdiction under such law, to be a district 
court or, as the case may be, such subordinate civil court for the area to which the jurisdiction of the 
Family Court extends.  
Explanation .—The suits and proceedings referred to in this sub -section are suits and proceedings of  
the following nature, namely: — 
(a) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage for a decree of nullity of marriage 
(declaring the marriage to be null and void or, as the case may be, annulling the marriage) or 
restitution of conjugal rights or judicial separation or dissolution of marriage;  
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the val idity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial 
status of any person;  5 
 (c) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the 
parties or of either of them;  
(d) a suit or proceeding for an order or injunction in circumsta nce arising out of a marital 
relationship;  
(e) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the legitimacy of any person;  
(f) a suit or proceeding for maintenance;  
(g) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the custody of, or access 
to, any minor.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Family Cour t shall also have and exercise — 
(a) the jurisdiction exercisable by a Magistrate of the first class under Chapter IX (relating to 
order for maintenance of  wife, children and parents) of the Code of Criminal P rocedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974); and  
(b) such other jurisdiction as may be conferred on it by any other enactment.  
8. Exclusion of jurisdiction and pending proceedings .—Where a Family Court has been 
established for any area, — 
(a) no district court or any subordinate civil court referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 7 shall, 
in relation to such area, have or exercise any jurisdiction in respect of any suit or proceeding of the 
nature referred to in the Explanation  to that sub -section;  
(b) no magistrate shall, in relation to such area, have or exercise any jurisdiction or power s under 
Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(c) every suit or proceeding of the nature referred to in the Explanation  to sub -section ( 1) of 
section 7 and every proceeding under Chapter IX of the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 
1974),— 
(i) which is pending immediately before the establishment of such Family Court before any 
district court or subordinate court referred to in that sub -section or, as the case may be, before any 
magistrate under the said Code; and  
(ii) which wou ld have been required to be instituted or taken before such Family Court if, 
before the date on which such suit or proceeding was instituted or taken, this Act had come into 
force and such Family Court had been established , 
shall stand transferred to such Family Court on the date on which it is established.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
9. Duty of Family Court to make efforts for settlement .—(1) In every suit or proceeding, 
endeavour  shall be made by the Family Court in the first instance, where it is possible to do so consistent 
with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist and persuade the parties in arriving at a settlement 
in respect of the subject -matter of the suit or  proceeding and for this purpose a Family Court may, subject 
to any rules made by the High Court, follow such procedure as it may deem fit.  
(2) If, in any suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to the Family Court that there is a reasonable 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Family Court may adjourn the proceedings for such 
period as it thinks fit to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.  
(3) The power conferred by sub -section ( 2) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of , any other 
power of the Family Court to adjourn the proceedings.  6 
 10. Procedure generally .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and of any oth er law for the time being in 
force shall apply to the suits and proceedings [other than the proceedings under Chapter IX of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] before a Family Court and for the purposes of the said provisions 
of the Code, a F amily Court shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have all the powers of such 
court.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or  the rules made thereunder, sha ll apply to the proceedings under Chapter 
IX of that Code before a Family Court.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall prevent a Family Court from laying down its 
own procedure with a view to arrive at a settlement in respect of the subject -matter of the suit or 
proceedings or at the truth of the facts alleged by  the one party and denied by the other.  
11. Proceedings to be held in camera .—In every suit or proceedings to which this Act applies, the 
proceedings may be held in camera  if the Family Court so desires and shall be so held if either party so 
desires.   
12.  Assistance of medical and welfare experts .—In every suit or proceedings, it shall be open to a 
Family Court to secure the services of a medical expert or such person (pr eferably a woman where 
available), whether related to the parties or not, including a person professionally engaged in promoting 
the welfare of the family as the Court may think fit, for the purposes of assisting the Family Court in 
discharging the functio ns imposed by this Act.  
13. Right to legal representation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, no party to a 
suit or proceeding before a Family Court shall be entitled, as of right, to be represented by a legal 
practitioner : 
Provided that if the Family Court considers it necessary in the interest of justice, it may seek the 
assistance of a legal expert as amicus curiae . 
14. Application of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 .—A Family Court may receive as evidence any 
report, statement, documents, information or matter that may, in its opinion, assist it to deal effectually 
with a dispute, whether or not the same would be otherwise relevant or admissible under the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
15. Record of oral evidence .—In suit s or proceedings before a Family Court, it shall not be 
necessary to record the evidence of witnesses at length, but the Judge, as the examination of each witness 
proceeds, shall, record or cause to be recorded, a memorandum of the substance of what the wi tness 
deposes, and such memorandum shall be signed by the witness and the Judge and shall form part of the 
record.  
16. Evidence of formal character on affidavit .—(1) The evidence of any person where such 
evidence is of a formal character, may be given by a ffidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be 
read in evidence in any suit or proceeding before a Family Court.  
(2) The Family Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of any of the parties to the suit 
or proceeding summon and examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.  
17. Judgment .—Judgment of a Family Court shall contain a concise statement of the case, the point 
for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for such decision.  
 18. Execution of decrees and orders .—(1) A decree or an order [other than an order under Chapter 
IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], passed by a Family Court shall have the same 
force and effect as a decree or order of a civil court and shall  be executed in the same manner as is 
prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the execution of decrees and orders.  
(2) An order passed by a Family Court under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974) shall be execu ted in the manner prescribed for the execution of such order by that Code.  7 
 (3) A decree or order may be executed either by the Family Court which passed it or by the other 
Family Court or ordinary civil court to which it is sent for execution.  
 
CHAPTER V  
1[APPEALS  AND REVISIONS ] 
19. Appeal .—(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2) and notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or in 
any other law, an appeal shall lie from every judgment or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a 
Family Court to the High Court both on facts and on law.  
(2) No appeal shall l ie from a decree or order passed by the Family Court with the consent of the 
parties  2[or from an order passed under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974):  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any appeal pending  before a High Court or 
any order passed under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) before the 
commencement of the Family Courts (Amendment) Act, 1991  (59 of 1991) .] 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment or order of a Family Court.  
 2[(4) The High Court may, of its own motion or otherwise, call for and examine the record of any 
proceeding in which the Family Court situate within its jurisdiction passed an  order under Chapter IX of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, 
legality or propriety of the order, not being an interlocutory order, and as to the regularity of such 
proceeding.]  
3[(5)] Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any court from any judgment, order or 
decree of a Family Court.  
4*   *   *   *  * 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
21. Power of High Court to make rules .—(1) The High Court may, by notificati on in the Official 
Gazette, make such rules as it  may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) normal working hours of Family Courts and holding of sittings of Family Courts on holidays 
and outside normal working hours;  
(b) holding of sittings of Family Courts at places other than their ordinary places of sitting;  
(c) efforts w hich may be made by, and the procedure which may be followed by, a Family Court 
for assisting and persuading parties to arrive at a settlement.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1991, s. 2, for “Appeals ” (w.e.f 28 -12-1991).  
2. Ins. by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1991).  
3. Sub -section ( 4) renumbered as sub -section ( 5) thereof by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1991) . 
4. Sub-section ( 6) by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide notification No. 
S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 
2020, notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020) .  
 8 
 22. Power of the Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, with the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, by notification, make rules prescribing the other qualifications 
for appointment of a Judge referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 4.  
(2) Every rule made und er this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have  effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
23. Power of the State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, after 
consultation with the High Court, by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the prov isions of sub -section ( 1) such rules 
may provide for all or any of  the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) the salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of Judges under  sub-section ( 6) of section 4;  
(b)the terms and conditions of association of counsel lors and the terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees referred to in section 6;  
(c) payment of fees and expenses (including travelling expenses) of medical and other experts and 
other persons referred to in section 12 out of the revenues of the State Government and the scales of 
such fees and expenses;  
(d) payment of fees and expenses to legal practitioners appointed under section 13 as amicus  
curiae  out of the revenues of the State Government and the scales of such fees and expenses;  
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or provided for by rules.  
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made , before the State Legislature.  
1 
 THE DOWRY PROHIBITION ACT, 1961  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1961  
[20th May, 1961 .] 
An Act to prohibit the giving or taking of dowry.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Dowry Prohibition     
Act, 1961.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition of “dowry”.—In this Act, “dowry ” means any property or valuable security given or 
agreed to be given either directly or indirectly — 
(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage; or  
(b) by the parent s of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the 
marriage or to any other person ; 
at or before  2[or any time after the marriage]  3[in connection with the marriage of the said parties, but 
does not include] dower or mahr  in the case of persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ) 
applies.  
4*         *                       *                 *       * 
Explanation  II.—The expression “valuable security ” has the same meaning as in section 30 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
3. Penalty for giving or taking dowry .—5[(1)] If any person, after the commencement of this Act, 
gives or takes or abets the giving or taking of dowry , he shall be punishable  6[with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than  7[five years, and with fine which shall not be less than fifteen thousand 
rupees or the amount of the value of such dowry, whichever is more]:  
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than  8[five years].]  
 9[(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to, or in relation to, — 
(a) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bride (wit hout any demand having 
been made in that behalf):  
Provided that such presents ar e entered in a list maintained in accordance with the rules made 
under this Act;  
(b) presents  which are given at the time of a marriage to the bridegroom (without any demand 
having been made in that behalf):  
Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in accordance with the rules made 
under this Act:  
                                                           
1. 1st July, 1961, vide notification No. S.O. 1410, dated 20th June, 1961, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 2, for “or after the marriage” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
3. Su bs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
4. The Explanation I omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
5. Section 3 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
7. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f.  19-11-1986).  
8. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
9. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  2 
 Provided further that where su ch presents are made by or on behalf of the bride or any person 
related to the bride, such presents ar e of a customary nature and the value thereof is not excessive 
having regard to the financial status of the person by whom, or on whose behalf, such prese nts ar e 
given.]  
1[4. Penalty for demanding dowry .—If any person demands, directly or indirectly, from the parents 
or other relatives or guardian of a bride or bridegroom, as the case may be, any dowry, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend 
to two years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees:  
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonme nt for a term of less than six months.]  
2[4A. Ban on advertisement .—If any person — 
(a) offers, through any advertisement in any newspaper, periodical, journal or through any other 
media, any share in his property or of any money or both as a share in any business or other interest 
as consideration for the marriage of his son or daughter or any other relative , 
(b) prints or publishes or circulates any advertisement referred to in clause ( a), 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, but which 
may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to fifteen thousand rupees:  
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be rec orded in the judgment, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months.]  
5. Agreement for giving or taking dowry to be void .—Any agreement for the giving or taking of 
dowry shall be void.  
6. Dowry to be for the benefit of the wife or h er heirs .—(1) Where any dowry is received by any 
person other than the woman in connection with whose marriage it is given, that person shall transfer it to 
the woman — 
(a) if the dowr y was received before marriage, within  3[three months] after the date of       
marriage; or  
(b) if the dowry was received at the time of or after the marriage, within  3[three months] after the 
date of its receipt; or  
(c) if the dowry was received when the woman was a minor, within  3[three months] after she has 
attained the age of eighteen years;  
and pending such transfer, shall hold it in trust for the benefit of the woman.  
4[(2) If any person fails to transfer any property as required by sub -section ( 1) within the time limit 
specified therefor  5[or as required by sub -section ( 3),] he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend to two years or with fine  6[which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees, but which may extend to ten thousand rupees] or with both.]  
(3) Where the woman entitled to any property under sub -section ( 1) dies before receiving it, the heirs 
of the woman shall be entitled to claim it from the person holding it for the time being:  
7[Provided that where such woman dies within seven years of he r marriage, otherwise than due to 
natural causes, such property shall, — 
(a) if she has no children, be transferred to her parents , or 
(b) if she has children, be transferred to such children and pending such transfer, be held in trust 
for such children.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s . 4, for section 4 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 5, for “one year” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
6. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “which may extend to ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
7. The proviso inserted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  3 
 1[(3A) Where a person convicted under sub -section ( 2) for failure to transfer any property as required 
by sub -section ( 1) 2[or sub -section ( 3)] has not, before his conviction under that sub -section, transferred 
such property to the woman entitled thereto or , as the case may be,  3[her heirs, parents or children] the 
Court shall, in addition to awarding punishment under that sub -section, direct, by order in writing, that 
such person shall transfer the property to such woman or, as the case may be,  3[her heirs, parents or 
children] within such period as may be specified in the order, and if such person fails to comply with     
the direction within the period so specified, an amount equal to the value of the property may be 
recovered from him as if it were a fine imposed by such Court and paid to such woman or, as the case 
may be, 3[her heirs, parents or children ].] 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of section 3 or section 4.  
4[7. Cognizance of offences .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), — 
(a) no Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence under this Act;  
(b) no court shall take co gnizance of an offence under this Act except upon — 
(i) its own knowledge or a police report of the facts which constitute such offence, or  
(ii) a complaint by the person aggrieved by the offence or a parent or other relative of such 
person, or by any recog nised welfare institution or organisation;  
(c) it shall be lawful for a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class to 
pass any sentence authorised by this Act on any person convicted of an offence under this Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “recogni sed welfare institution or organisation ” 
means a social welfare institution or organisation recogni sed in this behalf by the Central or State 
Government.  
(2) Nothing in Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Proced ure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , shall apply to 
any offence punishable under this Act.]  
5[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force a statement made by 
the person aggrieved by the offence shall not subject such person to a prosecu tion under this Act.]  
6[8. Offences to be cognizable for certain purposes and to be  bailable and                                
non-compoundable .—(1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply to offences 
under this Act as if they were cognizable offences — 
(a) for the purposes of investigation of such offences; and  
(b) for the purposes of matters other than — 
(i) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code; and  
(ii) the arrest of a person without a warrant or without an order of a Magistrate.  
(2) Every offence under this Act shall be  7[non-bailable] and non -compoundable.]  
8[8A. Burden of proof in certain cases .—Where any person is prosecuted for taking or abetting the 
taking of any dowry under section 3, or the demanding of dowry under section 4, the burden of proving 
that he had not committed an offence under th ose sections shall be on him.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s.  5 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “her heirs” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
4. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 6, for section 7 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 6 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
6. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 7, for section 8 ( w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
7. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 7, for “bailable” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
8. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  4 
 8B. Dowry Prohibition Officers .—(1) The State Government may appoint  as many D owry 
Prohibition Officers as it thinks fit and specify the areas in respect of which they shall exercise their 
jurisdiction and powers under this Act.  
(2) Every Dowry Prohibition Officer shall exercise and perform the following powers and functions, 
namely :— 
(a) to see that the provision s of this Act are complied with;  
(b) to prevent, as far as possible, the taking or abetting the taking of, or the demanding of, dowry;  
(c) to collect such evidence as may be necessary for the prosecution of persons committing 
offences under the Act; and  
(d) to perform such additional functions as may be assigned to him by the State Government, or 
as may be specified in the rules made under this  Act. 
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, confer such powers of a police 
officer as may be specified in the notification on the Dowry Prohibition Officer who shall exercise such 
powers subject to such limitations and cond itions as may be specified by rules made under this Act.  
(4) The State Government may, for the purpose of advising and assisting Dowry Prohibition Officers 
in the efficient performance of their functions under this Act, appoint an advisory board consisting  of not 
more than five social welfare workers (out of whom at least two shall be women) from the area in respect 
of which such Dowry Prohibition Officer exercises jurisdiction under sub -section ( 1).] 
9. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
1[(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the form and manner in which, and the person s by whom, any list of presents referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 shall be maintained and all other matters connected therewith; and  
(b) the better co -ordination of policy and action with respect to the administration of this Act.]  
2[(3)] Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  3[in two or more successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect on ly 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be , so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
4[10. Power of the State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the foll owing matters, namely: — 
(a) the additional functions to be performed by the Dowry Prohibition Officers under               
sub-section ( 2) of section 8B;  
(b) limitations and conditions subject to which a Dowry Prohibition Officer may exercise his 
functions  under sub -section ( 3) of section 8B.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after 
it is made before the State Legislature.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 8 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) renumbered as sub -section ( 3) thereof by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule , for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 9, for section 10 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
1 
 THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act not in derogation of any other law.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSUMER  PROTECTION  COUNCILS  
4. The Central Consumer Protection Council.  
5. Procedure for meetings of the Central Council.  
6. Objects of the Central Council.  
7. The State Consumer Protection Councils.  
8. Objects of the State Council.  
8A. The District Consumer Protection Council.  
8B.  Objects  of the District Council.  
 
CHAPTER III  
CONSUMER  DISPUTES  REDRESSAL  AGENCIES  
9. Establishment of Consumer Disputes Redressal Agencies.  
10. Composition of the District Forum.  
11. Jurisdiction of the District Forum.  
12. Manner in which complaint shall be made . 
13. Procedure on admission of complaint . 
14. Finding of the District Forum.  
15. Appeal . 
16. Composition of the State Commission . 
17. Jurisdiction of the State Commission.  
17A. Transfer of cases.  
17B. Circuit Benches . 
18. Procedure applicable to State Commissions.  
18A. [ Omitted.]  
19. Appeals.   
19A. Hearing of appeal . 
20. Composition of the National Commission.  
21. Jurisdiction of the National Commission.  
22. Power and p rocedure  applicable to the National Commission.  
22A. Power to set aside ex parte  orders.  
22B. Transfer of cases.  
22C. Circuit Benches.  
22D. Vacancy in the office of the President.  
22E. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of President and Member.  
23. Appeal.  
24. Finality of orders.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24A. Limitation period.  
24B. Administrative control.  
25. Enforcement of orders of the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission . 
26. Dismissal of frivolous or vexatious complaints.  
27. Penalties.  
27A. Appeal against order passed under section 27 . 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
28A. Service of notice, etc.  
29. Power to remove difficulties.  
29A. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to invalidate orders.  
30. Power to make rules.  
30A. Power of the National Commission to make regulations . 
31. Rules and regulations to be laid befor e each House of Parliament . 
  3 
 THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 68 OF 1986  
[24th December , 1986.]  
An Act to provide for the better protection of the interests of consumers and for that purpose to 
make provision for the establishment of consumer councils and other authorities for the 
settlement of consumers ’ disputes and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent,  commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the  Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except 1***. 
(3) It shall  come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different States and for di fferent provisions of this Act.  
(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the Central Government by notification, this Act shall 
apply to all goods and services.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the conte xt otherwise requires, — 
3[(a) “appropriate laboratory ” means a laboratory or organisation — 
(i) recogn ised by the Central Government;  
(ii) recognised  by a State Government, subject to such guidelines as may be pr escribed by the 
Central Govern ment in this behalf; or  
(iii) any such laboratory or organisation established by or under any law for the time being in 
force, which is maintained, financed or aid ed by the Central Government or a State Government 
for carrying out analysis or test of any goods with a view to determining whether such g oods 
suffer from any defect;]  
4[(aa) “branch office ” means — 
(i) any establishment described as a branch by the opposi te party; or  
(ii) any establishment carring on either the same or substantially the same activity as that 
carried on by the hea d office of the establishment;]  
(b) “complainant ” means —  
(i) a consumer; or  
(ii) any  voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956                     
(1 of 1956) or under any other law for the time being in force; or  
(iii) the Central Gove rnment or any State Government,  who or which makes a complaint;  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                       
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
2. 15th April, 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 390(E), dated 15th April,  1987 in respect of Chapters I,  II and IV , see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st July, 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 568(E), dated 10th June, 1987 in respect of Chapter III, see Gazette of  India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii).   
3. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993 , s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  4 
 1[(iv) one or more c onsumers, where there are nume rous consu mers having the same interest;]  
 2[(v) in case of dealth of a consumer, his legal heir or representa tive;] 
(c) “complaint ” means any allegation in writ ing made by a complainant that — 
3[(i) an unfair trade practice or a restrictive trade practice h as been adopted by 4[any trader  or 
service provider] ;] 
(ii) 5[the goods bou ght by him or agreed to be bou ght by him] s uffer from one or more 
defects;  
(iii) 6[the services hired or availed of or agreed to be h ired or availed of by him] suffer from 
deficiency in any respect;  
7[(iv) a trader or the service provider, as the case may be, has charged for the goods or for the 
services mentioned in the complaint, a price in excess of the price — 
(a) fixed by or under any law for the time being in force;  
(b) displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods;  
(c) displayed on the price list exhibited by him by or under any law for the time being in 
force;  
(d) agreed between the parties;  
(v) goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used are being offered for sale to 
the public, — 
(a) in contravention of any standards relating to safety of such goods as required to be 
complied with, by or under any law for the time being in force;  
(b) if the trader cou ld have known with due diligence that the goods so of fered are unsafe 
to the public;  
(vi) services which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to life and safety of the public 
when used, are being offered by the service provider which such person could have known with 
due diligence to be injurious to life and safety;]   
with a view to obtaining any relie f provided by or under this Act;  
(d) “consumer ” means any person who, — 
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and 
partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any user of such goods 
other than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly paid or 
partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment wh en such use is made with the 
approval of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for 
any commercial purpose; or  
(ii) 8[hires or avails of] any services for a conside ration which has been paid or p romised or 
partly pa id and partl y promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any 
beneficiary of such services other than the person who 8[hires or avails of] the services for 
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of 
deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned 
person  2[but does not include a person who avails of such services for any commercial purpose] .  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Ins. by Ac t 62 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2,  for “any trader” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by  Act 50 of 1993, s. 2, for “the goods mentioned in the complaint” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “the services mentioned in the complaint” (w.e.f 18 -6-1993).  
7. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2, for sub -clauses ( iv), (v) and ( vi) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
8. Subs. by 50 of 1993, s. 2, for “hires” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  5 
 1[Explanati on.—For the purposes of this clause,  “commecial purpose ” does not include use 
by a person of goods bought and used by him and services availed by him exclusively for the 
purposes of earning his livelihood by means of self -employment ;] 
(e) “consumer dispute ” means a dispute where the person aga inst whom a complaint has been 
made, denies or disputes the allegati ons contained in the complaint;  
(f) “defect ” means any fault , imperfection or shortcoming in the quality, quantity, potency, purity 
or standard which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being in force or 
2[under any contract, express or implied , or] as is claimed by the trader in any manner whats oever in 
relation to any goods;  
(g) “deficiency ” means any fault , imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature 
and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being 
in force or has been u ndertaken to be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or otherw ise in 
relation to any service;  
(h) “District Forum ” means a Consumer Dispute s Redressal Forum estalished under clause ( a) of 
section 9;  
(i) “goods ” means goods as defined in the Sal e of Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930);  
 3[(j) “manufacturer” means a person who — 
(i) makes or manufactures any goods or parts thereof; or  
(ii) does not make or manufacture any goods but assembles parts thereof made or 
manufactured by others; or  
(iii) puts  or causes to be put his own mark on any goods made or manufactured by any other 
manufacturer;]  
Explanation .—Where a manufacturer despatches  any goods or part thereof to any branch office 
maintained by him, such branch office shall not be deemed to be the manufacturer even though the 
parts so despatched to it are assembled at such branch office and are sold or distributed from such 
branch offi ce; 
 2[(jj) “member ” includes the President and a member of the National Commission or a State 
Commission or a Distr ict Forum, as the case may be;]  
(k) “National Commission ” means the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established under clause  (c) of section 9;  
(l) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(m) “person ” includes, — 
(i) a firm whether registered or not;  
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;  
(iii) a co -operative society;  
(iv) every  other association of persons whether registered under the Societies Registration  
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or not;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the State Government, or as the case may be, 
by the Cen tral Government under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2, for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
 6 
 1[(nn) “regulation” means the regulations made by the Natio nal Commission under this Act;  
 (nnn) “restrictive trade practice” means a trade practice which tends to bring about manipulation 
of price or its conditions of delivery or to affect flow of supplies in  the market relating to goods or 
services in such a manner as to impose on the consumers unjustified costs or restrictions and shall 
include — 
(a) delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader in supply of such goods or in providing the 
services which has l ed or is likely to lead to rise in the price;  
(b) any trade practice which requires a consumer to buy, hire or avail of any goods or, as the 
case may be, services as condition precedent to buying, hiring or availing of other goods or 
services;]  
(o) “service ” means service of any description which is made available to potential 2[users and 
includes , but not limited to, the provision of ] facilities in connection with banking, financing, 
insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other ene rgy, board or lodging or both, 
3[housing construction,] entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or other information, but 
does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or under a contract of personal service;  
4[(oo) “spurious goods and services” mean such goods and services which are claimed to be 
genuine but they are actually not so;]  
(p) “State Commission ” means a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission established in a 
State under clause ( b) of section 9;  
(q) “trader”, in relation to any goods means a person who sells or distributes any goods for sale 
and includes the manufacturer thereof, and where such goods are sold or distributed in package for m, 
includes the packer thereof;  
5[(r) “unfair trade practice ” means a trade practice which, for the purpose of promoting the sale, 
use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or 
deceptive practice inclu ding any of the following practices, namely: — 
(1) the practi ce of making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by  visible 
representation which, — 
(i) falsely represents that the goods are of a particular standard, quality, quantity, grad e, 
composition, style or model;  
(ii) falsely  represents that the services are of a particular  standard, quality or grade;  
(iii) falsely represents any re -built, second -hand, renovated, reconditi oned or old goods as 
new goods;  
(iv) represents that the goods or services have sponsorship, approval, per formance, 
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits which such  goods or services do not have;  
(v) represents that the seller or the supplier has a sponsorship or approval or affiliation 
which such se ller or supplier does not have;  
(vi) makes a false o r misleading representation concerning the need for, or the useful ness 
of, any goods or services;  
(vii) gives to th e public any warranty or guara ntee of the performance, efficacy or length 
of life of a product or of any goods that is not based on an a dequate or proper test thereof:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2, for clause ( nn) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “users and include s the provisions of” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2  (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2, for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  7 
 Provided that where a defence is raised to the effect that such warranty or guarantee is 
based on adequate or proper test, the burden of proof of such defence shall lie on t he person 
raising such defence;  
(viii) makes to the  public a representation in a form that purports to be— 
(i) a warranty or guarantee of a product or of any goods or services; or  
(ii) a promi se to replace, maintain or rep air an article or any part thereof or to repeat 
or continue a service until it has ac hieved a specified result,  
if such purported warranty or guarantee or promise is materially mislea ding or if there is no 
reasona ble prospect that s uch warranty, guarantee or promise will be carried out;  
(ix) materially misleads the public concerning the p rice at which a product or like 
products or goods or services, have been or are, ordinarily sold or provided, and,  for this 
purpose, a representa tion as to price shall be deemed to refer to the price at which the product 
or goods or services has or have be en sold by sellers or provided by suppliers generally in the 
relevant market unless it is clearly specified to be the price at which the product has been sold 
or services have been provided by the person by whom or on whose beh alf the representation 
is mad e; 
(x) gives false or misleading facts disparaging  the goods, services or trade of another 
person.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( 1), a statement that is — 
(a) expressed on an article offered or displ ayed for sale, or on its wrapper or 
container;  or 
(b) expressed on anything attached to, inserted in, or accompanying, an article 
offered or displayed for sale, or on anything on which the article is mounted for display 
or sale; or  
(c) contained  in or on anything that is sold, sent, delivered, transmitted or in any 
other manner whatsoever made available to a member of the public,  
shall be deemed to be a statement made to the public by, and only by, the person who had caused the 
statement to be s o expressed, made or contained;  
(2) permits the publication of any advertisement whether in any newspaper or otherwise, for 
the sale or supply at a bargain price, of goods or services that are not intended to be offered for 
sale or supply at the bargain pr ice, or for a  period that is, and in quanti ties that are, reasonable, 
having regard to the nature of the market in which the business is carried on, the nature and size 
of business, and t he nature of the advertisement.  
Explanation .—For the purpose  of claus e (2), “bargaining price ” means — 
(a) a price that is stated in any advertisement to be a bargain price, by reference to an 
ordinary price or otherwise, or  
(b) a price that a person who reads, hears or sees the adver tisement, would reasonably 
understand to be a bargain price having regard to the prices at which the product advertised or 
like product s are ordinarily sold;  
(3) permits — 
(a) the offering of gifts, prizes or other items with the intention of not providing them as 
offered or creating impression that something is being given or  offered free of charge when it  
is fully or partly covered by the amount charged  in the transaction as a whole;  
(b) the conduct of any contest, lottery, game of chance or skill, for the purpose of 
promoting, directly or indi rectly, the sale, use or supply of any pr oduct or any business 
interest;  8 
 1[(3A) withholding from the participants of any scheme offering gifts, prizes or other items 
free of charge, on its closure the information about final results of the scheme.  
Explanat ion.—For the purposes of this sub -clause, the participants of a scheme shall be 
deemed to have been informed of the final results of the scheme where such results are within a 
reasonable time published, prominently in the same newspapers in which the schem e was 
originally advertised ]; 
(4) permits the sale or supply of goods intended to be used, or are of a kind likely to be used, 
by consumers, knowing or having reason to believe that the goods do not comply with the 
standards prescribed by competent authority relating to performance, composition contents, 
design, constructions, finishing or packaging as are necessary to prevent or re duce the risk of 
injury  to the person using the goods;  
(5) permits the hoarding or destruction of goods, or refuses to sell the goods or to make them 
available for sale or to provide any service, if such hoarding or destruction or refusal raises or 
tends t o raise or is intended to raise, the cost of those or o ther similar goods or services ]; 
 1[(6) manufacture of spurious goods or offering such goods for sale or adopting deceptive 
practices in the provision of services. ] 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any  other Act or provision thereof which is not in force in any area to 
which this Act applies shall be construed to have a reference to the corresponding Act or provision 
thereof in force in such area.  
3. Act not in derogation of any other law. —The provision s of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSUMER  PROTECTION  COUNCILS  
4. The Central Consumer Protection Council .—(1) 2[The Central  Government shall] , by 
notification, establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be 
known as the Central Consumer Protection Council (hereinafter refer red to as the Central Council).  
(2) The Central Council shall consist of the follo wing members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in charge of 3[consumer affairs] in the Central Government,  who shall be its 
Chairman, and  
(b) such number of other official or non -official members representing such interests as may be 
prescribed.  
5. Procedure for meetings of the Central Council .—(1) The Central Council shall meet as and 
when necessary, but 4[at least one meeting] of the Co uncil shall be held every year.  
(2) The Central Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairman may think fit and shal l 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be prescribed.  
6. Objects of the Central Council. —The objects of the Central Council shall be to promote and 
protect the ri ghts of the consumers such as, — 
(a) the right to be protected against the marketing of goods 5[and services] which are hazardous to 
to life and property ; 
(b) the right to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity , standard and price of 
goods  5[or services,  as the case may be ,] so as to protect the consumer against unfair trade practices;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “The Central Government may” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 3, for “the Department of Food and Civil Supplies”  (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “not less than three meetings” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
5. Ins. by s. 5 , ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  9 
 (c) the right to be assured, wherever possible, access to a variety of goods 1[and s ervices] at 
competitive prices;  
(d) the right to be heard and to be assured that consumers ’ interests will receive due consi deration 
at appropriate forums;  
(e) the right to seek redressal a gainst unfair trade practices 1[or restrictive trade practices] or 
unscrupulous  exploitation of consumers; and  
(f) the right to consumer education.  
7. The Sta te Consumer Protection Councils .—(1) 2[The State Government shall ], by notification, 
establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be known as the 
Consumer Protection Council for .......................( hereinafter ref erred to as the State Council).  
3[(2) The State Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister incharge of consumer affairs in the State Govern ment who shall be its Chairman;  
(b) such number of other official or no n-official members representing such interests as may be 
presc ribed by the State Governments ; 
4[(c) such number of other official or non -official members, not exceeding ten, as may be 
nominated by the Central Government. ] 
(3) The State Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two mee tings shall be held 
every year.  
(4) The State Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairman may think fit and shall 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be pre scribed by the State 
Government .] 
8. Objects of the State Council. —The objects of every State Council shall be to promote and protect 
within the State the rights of the consumers laid down in clauses ( a) to ( f) of section 6.  
5[8A.The District Consumer Protection Council .—(1) The State Government shall establish for 
every district, by notification, a council to be known as the District Consumer Protection Council with 
effect from such date as it may specify in such notification.  
(2) The District Consumer  Protection Council (herein after referred to as the District Council) shall 
consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Collector of the district (by whatever name called), who shall be its Chairman; and  
(b) such  number of other official and non -official members representing such interests as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) The District Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two meetings shall be 
held every year.  
(4) The District  Council shall meet as such time and place within the district as the Chairman may 
think fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be pres cribed 
by the State Government.  
8B. Objects of the District Council .—The objects of every District Council shall be to promote and 
protect within the district the rights of the consumers laid down in clauses ( a) to ( f) of section 6.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 5 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 4, for “The State Government may” ( w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by  Act 50 of 1993 , s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003).  
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
 10 
 CHAPTER III  
CONSUMER  DISPUTE  REDRESSAL  AGENCIES  
9. Establishment of Consumer Disputes Redressal Agencies .—There shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act, t he following agencies, namely: — 
(a) a Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum to be known as the “District Forum ” established by the 
State Gover nment 1*** in each distric t of the State  by notification:  
2[Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one  District Forum 
in a district.]  
(b) a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission to be known as the “State Commission ” 
estab lished by the State Government 1*** in the State by notification; and  
(c) a National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission established by the Central Government 
by notification.  
10. Comp osition of the District Forum. —3[(1) Each D istrict Forum shall consist of — 
(a) a person who is, or has been , or is qualified to be a District Jud ge, who shall be its President;  
4[(b) two other members, one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the fol lowing 
qualifications, namely: — 
(i) be not less than thirty -five years of age,  
(ii) possesss a bachelor ’s degree from a recogni sed university,  
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate knowledge and 
experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems relating to economics, law, 
commerce, accountancy, i ndustry, public affairs or administration:  
Provided that a persons shall be disqualified for appoint ment as a member, if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the 
opinion of the State Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has bee n removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body 
corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the State Government, such financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member; or  
(f) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the State Government; ]] 
5[(1A) Every appointment under sub -section ( 1) shall be made by the State Government on the 
recommendation of a selection committee consist ing of the following, namely: — 
(i) Presi dent of the State Commission      —Chairman,  
(ii) Secretary, Law Dep artment of the State    —Member,  
(iii) Secretary , incharge of t he Department dealing  
      with cunsumer affairs in the State                   —Member :]  
6[Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason of absence or otherwise, 
unable to act as Chairman of the Selection Committee, the State Government may refer the matter to the 
Chief Justice of the High Court for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act as Chairman.]  
                                                           
1. The words “with the prior approval of the Central Government” omitted by Act 50 of 1993, s. 7  (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Ins. by  s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 6, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 8 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).   
6. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 11 
 1[(2) Every member of the District Forum shall hold office for a term of five years or up to the age of 
sixty -five years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years or up to the 
age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, subject to the condition that he fulfils the qualifications and 
other conditions for appointment mentione d in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and such re -appointment is 
also made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee:  
Provided further that a member may resign his office in writing under his hand addressed to the State 
Government and on s uch resignation being accepted, his office shall become vacant and may be filled by 
appointment of a person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in relation to 
the category of the member who is required to be appointed under th e provisions of sub -section ( 1A) in 
place of the person who has resigned:  
Provided also that a person appointed as the President or as a member, before the commencement of 
the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002) , shall continue to hold s uch office as 
President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his term.]  
(3) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of the members of the District Forum shall be such as may b e prescribed by the State 
Government:  
2[Provided that the appointment of a member on whole -time basis shall be made by the State 
Government on the recommendation of the President of the State Commission taking into consideration 
such factors as may be pres cribed including the work load of the District Forum.]  
11. Juri sdiction of the District Forum. —(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the District 
Forum shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services and the 
compensation, if any, claimed 3[does  not exceed rupees twenty  lakhs].  
(2) A complaint shall b e instituted in a District Forum within the local  limits of whose jurisdiction, —  
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time 
of the institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides or 4[carries o n business or has a 
branch office or ] personally work s for gain; or  
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the institution of the 
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or 5[carries on business or has a branch office] , or 
personally works for gain, provided that in such case either the permission of the District Forum is 
given, or the opposite parties who do not reside, or 6[carry on business  or have a branch office] , or 
personally work for gain, as the  case may be, ac quiesce in such institution; or  
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.  
7[12. Manner in  which complaint shall be made. —(1) A complaint in relation to any goods sold or 
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided may be filed 
with a District Forum by — 
(a) the consumer to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sol d or delivered or 
such service provided or agreed to be provided;  
(b) any recognised consumer association whether the consumer to whom the goods sold or 
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or service provided or agreed to be provided is a member 
of such association or not;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 62 of 2002,  s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by  s. 7, ibid., for “does not exceed rupees five lakhs ” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ) 
4. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 9, for “carries on business or” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “carries on business” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “carry on business” (w.e.f 18 -6-1993).  
7. Subs. by  Act 62 of 2002, s. 8,  for section 12 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
. 12 
 (c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the same interest, with 
the permission of the District Forum, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all consumers so interested; or  
(d) the Central  Government  or the State Government, as the case may be, either in its individual 
capacity or as a representative of interests of the consumers in general.  
(2) Every complaint filed under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied with such amount of fee and 
payable in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of a complaint made under sub -section ( 1), the District Forum may, by order, allow the 
complaint to be proceeded with or rejected:  
Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected under this sub -section unless an opportunity of being 
heard has been given to the complainant:  
Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided within twenty -one 
days from the date on which the complaint was received.  
(4) Where a complaint is allowed to  be proceeded with under sub -section ( 3), the District Forum may 
proceed with the complaint in the manner provided under this Act:  
Provided that where a complaint has been admitted by the District Forum, it shall not be transferred to 
any other court or tr ibunal or any authority set up by or under any other law for the time being in force.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “recognised consumer association ” means any 
voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1 956) or any other law 
for the time being in force. ] 
13. 1[Procedure on admission  of complaint ].—(1) The District Forum shall, 2[on admission of a 
complaint ], if it relates to any goods, — 
3[(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within twenty -one days from the date of its 
admission to the opposite party mentioned in the complaint directing him to give his version of the 
case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may be 
granted by the District Forum;]  
(b) where the opposite party on receipt of a complaint referred to him under clause ( a) denies or 
disputes the allegations contained  in the complaint, or omits or fails to take any action to represent his 
case within the time given by the District Forum, the D istrict Forum shall proceed to settle the 
consumer dispute in the manner specified in clauses ( c) to ( g); 
(c) where the complaint alleges a defect in the goods which cannot be determined without proper 
analysis or test of the goods, the District Forum shal l obtain a sample of the goods from the 
complainant, seal it and authenticate it in the manner prescribed and refer the sample so sealed to the 
appropriate laboratory along with a direction that such laboratory make an analysis or test, whichever 
may be ne cessary, with a view to finding out whether such goods suffer from any defect alleged in the 
complaint or from any other defect and to report its findings thereon to the District Forum within a 
period of forty -five days of the receipt of the reference or w ithin such extended period as may be  
granted by the District Forum;  
(d) before any sample of the goods is referred to any appropriate laboratory under clause ( c), the 
District Forum may require the complainant to deposit to the credit of the Forum such fee s as may be 
specified, for payment to the appropriate laboratory for carrying out the necessary analysis or test in 
relation to the goods in question;  
(e) the District Forum shall remit the amount deposited to its credit under clause ( d) to the 
appropriate  laboratory to enable it to carry out the analysis or test mentioned in clause ( c) and on 
receipt of the report from the appropriate laboratory, the District Forum shall forward a copy of the 
report along with such remarks as the District Forum may feel ap propri ate to the opposite party;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002,  s. 9, for “Procedure on receipt of complaint.” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “on receipt of a complaint” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 13 
 (f) if any of the parties disputes the correctness of the findings of the appropriate laboratory, or 
disputes the correctness of the methods of analysis or test adopted by the appropriate laboratory, the 
District Forum shal l require the opposite party or the complainant to submit in writing his objections 
in regard to the report made  by the appropriate laboratory;  
(g) the District Forum shall thereafter give a reasonable opportunity to the complainant as well as 
the opposite  party of being heard as to the correctness or otherwise of the report made by the 
appropriate laboratory and also as to the objection made in relation thereto under clause ( f) and issue 
an appr opriate order under section 14.  
(2) The District Forum shall, if the 1[complaint s admitted]  by it under section 12 relates to goods in 
respect of which the procedure specified in sub -section ( 1) cannot be followed, or if the compl aint relates 
to any services, — 
(a) refer a copy of such complaint to the opposite party directing him to give his version of 
the case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may 
be granted by the District Forum;  
(b) where the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of the complaint, referred to him un der 
clause ( a) denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or omits or fails to take 
any  action to represent his case within the time given by the District Forum, the District Forum 
shall proceed to  settle the consumer dispute, — 
(i) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complainant and the opposite 
party, where the opposite party denies or disputes the allegations  contained in the complaint, 
or 
(ii) 2[ex parte  on the basis of evidence] brought to its notice by the compla inant where the 
opposite party omits or fails to take any action to represent his case with in the time given by 
the Forum.  
3[(c) where the complainant fails to appear on the date of hearing before the District Forum, 
the District Forum may either dismiss t he complaint for default or decide it on merits. ] 
(3) No proceedings complying with the procedure laid down in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be 
called in question in any court on the ground that the principles of natural justi ce have not been complied 
with.  
 3[(3A) Every complaint shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to 
decide the complaint within a period of three months from the date of receipt of notice by opposite party 
where the complaint does not require analysis  or testing of commodities and within five months, if it 
requires analysis or testing of commodities:  
Provided that no adjournment shall be ordinarily granted by the District Forum unless sufficient cause 
is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by the Forum:  
Provided further that the District Forum shall make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the 
adjournment as may be provided in the regulations made under this Act:  
Provided also that in the event of a complaint being disposed of after the period so specified, the 
District Forum shall record in writing, the reasons for the same at the time of disposing of the said 
complaint.  
(3B) Where during the pendency of any proceeding before the District Forum, it a ppears to it 
necessary, it may pass such interim order as is just and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case. ] 
(4) For the purposes of this section, the District Forum shall have the same powers as are vested in a 
civil court under the Code of C ivil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) wh ile trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters, namely: — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 9, for “complaint received” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s.  9, ibid., for “on the basis of evidence” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 14 
 (i) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any defendant or witness and examining the 
witness on oath;  
(ii) the discovery and production of any docum ent or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(iii) the recep tion of evidence on affidavits;  
(iv) the requisitioning of the report of the concerned analysis or test from the appropriate 
laboratory or from any other relevant source;  
(v) issuing  of any commission for the examination of any witness; and  
(vi) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(5) Every proceeding before the District Forum shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and  228 of the Indian Pe nal Code (45 of 1860) , and the District Forum shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195, and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
1[(6) Where the complainant is  a consumer referred to in sub -clause ( iv) of clause ( b) of                         
sub-section ( 1) of section 2, the pro visions of rule 8 of Order I of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) sha ll apply subject to the modifi cation that every reference therein to a s uit 
or decree shall be construed as a reference to a complaint or the order of the District Forum thereon.]  
 2[(7) In the event of death of a complainant who is a consumer or of the opposite party against whom 
the complaint has been filed, the provisions of Order XXII of the First Scheduled to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to the 
plaintiff and the defendant shall be construed as reference to a complainant or the opposite p arty, as the 
case may be. ] 
14. Finding of the District Forum .—(1) If, after the proceeding conducted under section 13, the 
District Forum is satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any of the defects specified in 
the complaint or that any o f the allegations contained in the complaint about the services are proved, it 
shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him to 3[do] one or more of  the following things, 
namely: — 
(a) to remove the defect pointed out by the appropriate laboratory from the goods in question;  
(b) to replace the goods with new goods of similar description which shall be free from any 
defect;  
(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may b e, the charges paid by the 
complainant;  
(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer for any loss or 
injury suffered by the consumer due to the negl igence of the opposite party:  
4[Provided that the District Forum shall ha ve the power to grant punitive damages in such 
circumstances as it deems fit;]  
5[(e) to 6[remove the defects  in goods]  or deficiencies  in the services in question;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 11 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 12, for “take” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993 , s. 12 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
6. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 10, for “remove the defects” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 15 
 (f) to discontinue the unfair  trade practice or the restric tive trade practice or not to repeat them;  
(g) not to offe r the hazardous goods for sale;  
(h) to withdraw the hazardous goo ds from being offered for sale;  
1[(ha) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from offering services which are 
hazardous in nature;  
(hb) to pay such  sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss or injury has been 
suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiable conveniently:  
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be less than five per cent. of  the 
value of such defective goods sold or services provided, as the case may be, to such consumers:  
Provided further that the amount so obtained shall be  credited in favour of such person and 
utilized in such  manner as may be prescribed;  
(hc) to issue cor rective advertisement to neutralize the effect of misleading advertisement at the 
cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing such misleading advertisement;]  
(i) to provide for adequate costs to parties.]  
  2[(2) Every  proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be conducted by the President of the 
District Forum and at least one m ember thereof sitting together:  
3[Provided that where a member, for any reason, is unable to conduct a proceeding till it is completed, 
the President and the  other member shall continue the proceeding from the stage at which it was last heard 
by the previous member.]  
(2A) Every order made by the District Forum under sub -section ( 1) shall be signed by its President 
and the member or members  who conducted the proceeding:  
Provided that where the proceeding is conducted by the President and one member and they differ on 
any point or points, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and refer the same to the other 
member for hea ring on such point or points and the opinion of the majority shall be th e order of the 
District Forum.]  
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions, the procedure relating to the conduct of the meetings of the 
District Forum, its sittings and other matters sha ll be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
15. Appeal .—Any person aggrieved by an order made by the District Forum may prefer an appeal 
against such order to the State Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of the order, in 
such form a nd manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the State Commis sion may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it wit hin that period:  
4[Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in ter ms of an order 
of the District Forum, shall be entertained by the State Commission unless the appellant has deposited in 
the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that amount or twenty -five thousand rupees, whichever is less.]  
16. Composition of the State C ommission .—(1) Each Sta te Commission shall consist of — 
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, appointed by the State Government , who 
shall be its P resident:  
5[Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except after consultation with the 
Chief Justice of the High Court;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 34 of 1991, s. 2, for the sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -6-1991).  
3. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 10, for the proviso (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid.  (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  16 
  1[(b) not less than two, and not more than such number of members, as may be prescribed, and 
one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the following qualifications, namely: — 
(i) be not less than t hirty -five years of age;  
(ii) possess a bachelor’s degree from a recognised university; and  
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate knowledge and 
experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems relating to economics, law, commerce, 
accountancy, industry, public affairs or administration:  
Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the  members shall be from amongst persons having a  
judicial background.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, the expression “persons having a judicial background” 
shall mean persons having knowledge and experience for at least a period of ten years as a presiding 
officer at the district level court or any tribunal at equivalent level : 
Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member, if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
State Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarge d insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body corporate 
owned or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the State G overnment, such financial or other interest, as is likely to 
affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member; or  
(f) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the State Government .] 
2[(1A) Every  appointment under sub -section ( 1) shall be made by the State Government on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(i) President of the State Commission     — Chairman;  
(ii) Secretary of the Law Department  
of the State    — Member;  
(iii) Secretary incharge of                            
the Departm ent dealing with Consumer 
Affairs in the State  — Member:  
Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason of absence or otherwise, 
unable to act as Chairman of the Selection Committee, the State Government may refer the matter to the 
Chief Justice of the High Court for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act as Chairman.  
(1B) (i) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Sta te Commission may be exercised by Benches 
thereof.  
(ii) A Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members as the President may 
deem fit.  
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be decided according to 
the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are equally divided, they shall state 
the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall either hear the 
point or points himself or refer  the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more or the other 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 12, for clause ( b) and the proviso (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 17 
 members and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the  majority of the 
members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.]  
(2) The s alary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service 1*** of, the members of the State Commission shall be such as may be presc ribed by the State 
Government :  
2[Provided that the appointment of a member on whole -time basis shall be made by the State 
Government on the recommendation of the President of the State Commission taking into consideration 
such factors as may be prescribed including the work load of the State Commission.]  
3[(3) Every member of the St ate Commission shall hold office for a term of five years or up to the age 
of sixty -seven years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years or up to the 
age of sixty -seven years, whichever is earlier, subject to the condition that he fulfils the qualifications and 
other conditions for appointment mention ed in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and such re -appointment is 
made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee:  
Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the State Commission shall also be eligible 
for re -appointment in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of this section:  
Provided also that a member may resign his office in writing under his hand addressed to the State 
Government and on such resignation being accepted, his office shall become vacant and m ay be filled by 
appointment of a person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in relation to 
the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the provisions of sub -section ( 1A) in 
place of the person who has resi gned.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), a person appointed as the President or as a 
member, before the commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002) , 
shall continue to hold such office as President or m ember, as the case may be, till the completion of his 
term.]  
17. Jurisdiction of the State Commission .—4[(1)] Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
State Commi ssion shall have jurisdiction — 
(a) to entertain — 
(i) complaints  where the value of the goods or services and compensation, if any, claimed 
5[exceeds rupees twenty  lakhs but does not exceed rupees one crore ]; and 
(ii) appeals against the orders of any Distr ict Forum within the State; and  
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending 
before or has been decided by any District Forum within the State, where it appears to the State 
Commission that such District Forum has exercised a jurisdiction  not vested in it by law, or has failed 
to exercise a jurisdiction so vested or has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material 
irregularity.  
6[(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a State Commission within the limits of whose juris diction, — 
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time 
of the institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or has a 
branch office or personally works for gain; or 
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the institution of the 
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or has a branch office or personally 
works for gain, provided that in such case eit her the permission of the State Commission is given or 
the opposite parties who do not reside or carry on business or have a branch office or personally 
works for gain, as the case may be, acquiesce in such institution; or  
                                                           
1. The brackets and  words “(including tenure of office)” omitted by  Act 50 of 1993, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 12 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs . by s. 12, ibid.,  for sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. S. 17 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 13 , ibid (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “exceeds rupees five lakhs but does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs” (w.e.f. 15-3-2003 ). 
6. Ins. by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 18 
 (c) the cause of action, wholly o r in part, arises.]  
1[17A. Transfer of cases .—On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the State 
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, transfer any complaint pending before the District 
Forum to another District Forum within th e State if the i nterest of justice so requires.  
17B. Circuit Benches .—The State Commission shall ordinarily function in the State Capital but may 
perform its functions at such other place as the State Government may, in consultation with the State 
Commission, notify in the Official Gazette, from time to time.]  
18. Procedure applicable to State Commissions .—2[The provisions of sections 12, 13 and 14 and 
the rules made thereunder] for  the disposal of complaints by the District Forum shall, with such 
modifications as may be necessary, be applicable to the disposal of disputes by the State Commission.  
18A.  [Vacancy in the office of the President .]—Omitted by the Consumer Protection (Amendment) 
Act, 2002  (62 of 2002 ), s. 15 (w.e.f. 15-3-2003).  
19. Appeals. —Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State Commission in exercise of its 
powers conferred by sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of section 17 may prefer an appeal against such order to 
the National Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of the order in such form and 
mann er as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the National Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for n ot filing it within  that period:  
3[Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order 
of the State Commission, shall be entertained by the National Commission unless the appellant has 
deposited in the prescribed manner fifty p er cent. of the amount or rupees thirty -five thousand, whichever 
is less.]  
4[19A. Hearing of appeal .—An appeal filed before the State Commission or the National 
Commission shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour  shall be made to  finally dispose 
of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its admission:  
Provided that no adjournment shall be ordinarily granted by the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, unless sufficien t cause is shown and the reasons for grant of 
adjournment have been recorded in writing by such Commission:  
Provided further that the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall 
make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the adjournment as may be provided in the regulations 
made under this Act:  
Provided also that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period so specified, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record in writin g the reasons for the 
same at the time of disposing of the said appeal.]  
20. Composition of the National Commission .—(1) The Natio nal Commission shall consist of — 
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, to be appointed by the Central 
Government , who shall be its President:  
5[Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except after consultation wi th the 
Chief Justice of India;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 15, for “The procedure specified in sections 12, 13 and 14 and under the rules made thereunder ”                       
(w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
3. Ins. by  Act 62 of 2002,  s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003).  
5. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 16 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  19 
 1[(b) not less than four, and not more than such number of members, as may be prescribed, and 
one of whom shall  be a woman,  who shall  have  the following  qualifications, namely: — 
(i) be not less than thirty -five years of age;  
(ii) possess  a bachelor’s degree from a recognised university; and  
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing and have adequate knowledge and 
experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems relating to economics, law, commerce, 
accountancy, industry , public affairs or administration:  
Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members shall be from amongst the persons having 
a judicial background.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “persons having judicial background”  
shall mean persons having knowledge and experience for at least a period of ten years as a presiding 
officer at the district level court or any tribunal at equivalent level:  
Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment, if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body corporate 
owned or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially the discha rge by him of his functions as a member; or  
(f) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided also that every appointment under this clause shall be made by the Central Government on 
the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the following, namely: — 
 (a) a person who is a Judge of the 
Supreme Court , to be nominated by 
the Chief Justice of India     —Chairman ; 
(b) the Secretary in the Department 
of Legal Affairs in the Government of 
India  —Member ; 
 (c) Secretary of the Department 
dealing with Consumer Affairs in the 
Government of India  —Member.]  
2[(1A) (i) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the National Commission may be exercised by 
Benches thereof.  
(ii) A Bench may be constituted  by the President with one or more members as the President may 
deem fit.  
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be decided according to 
the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are e qually divided, they shall state 
the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall either hear the 
point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more or the other 
members and  such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the 
members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 18, for clause ( b) and the proviso (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 20 
  (2) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of  
service 1*** of the members of the National Commission shall be such as may be prescr ibed by the 
Central Government.  
2[(3) Every member of the National Commission shall hold office for a term of five years or up to the 
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years or up to the 
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, subject to the condition that he fulfils the qualifications and 
other conditions for appointment me ntioned in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and such re -appointment is 
made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee:  
Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the National Commission shall also be 
eligible for re -appoint ment in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1): 
Provided also that a member may resign his office in writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government and on such resignation being accepted, his office shall become vacant and may be filled by 
appointment of a person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in relation to 
the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the provisions of sub -section ( 1A) in 
place of the person who has resigned.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), a person appointed as a President or as a 
member before the commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002)  
shall continue to hold such office as President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his 
term.]  
21. Jurisdiction of the National Commission. —Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
National Commi ssion shall have jurisdiction — 
(a) to entertain — 
(i) complaints  where the value of the goods or services and compensation, if any, claimed 
exceeds 3[rupees one crore ]; and  
(ii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission; and  
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending 
before or has been decided by any State Commission where it appears to the National Commission 
that such State Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to 
exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or has acte d in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with 
material irregularity.  
4[22. Power and procedure applicable to the National Commission. —(1) The provisions of 
sections 12, 13 and 14 and the rules made thereunder for the disposal of complaints by the  District Forum 
shall, with such modifications as may be considered necessary by the Commission, be applicable to the 
disposal of disputes by the National Commission.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the National Commission shall 
have the power to review any order made by it, when there is an error a pparent on the face of record.  
22A. Power to set aside ex parte  orders. —Where an order is passed by the National Commission  ex 
parte  against the opposite party or a complainant, as the case may be, the aggrieved party may apply to 
the Commission to set aside the said or der in the interest of justice.  
22B. Transfer of cases. —On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, th e National 
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer any complaint pending 
                                                           
1. The brackets and words “ (including tenure of office)” omitted by Act 50 of 1993, s. 16 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 18 , for sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ).  
3. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “rupees twenty lakhs” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 20, ibid.,  for section 22 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
 21 
 before the District Forum of one State to a District Forum of another State or before one State 
Commission to another State Commission.  
22C. Circuit Benches. —The National Commission shall ordinarily function at New Delhi and 
perform its functions at such other place as the Central Government may, in consultation with the 
National Commission, notify in the Official Gazette, from time to time.  
22D. Vacancy in the office of the President. —When the office of President of a District Forum, 
State Commission, or of the National Commission, as the case may be, is vacant or a person occupying 
such office is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, these shall be 
performed by the senior -most member of the District Forum, the State Commission or of the National 
Commission, as the case may be:  
Provided that where a retired Judge of a High Court is a member of the Na tional Commission, such 
member or where the number of such members is more than one, the senior -most person among st such 
members, shall preside over the National Commission in the absence of President of that Commission.]  
1[22E. Qualifications, terms and c onditions of service of President and Member .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications,  appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and the  other terms and conditions of service of the President and 
other members of the  National Commission appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter 
VI of  the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the President and member appointed befor e the commencement of  Part XIV of Chapter 
VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the  provisions of this Act, and the rules 
made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184  of the Finance Act , 2017 had not come into force. ] 
23. App eal.—Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the National Commission in exercise of its 
power s conferred by sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of section 21, may prefer an appeal against such order to 
the Supreme Court within a period of thirty d ays from the date of the order:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that perio d: 
2[Provided further that no appeal by a pe rson who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order 
of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme Court unless that person has deposited in 
the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that amount or rupees fifty thousand, whichever is  less.]  
24. Finality of orders .—Every order of a District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Commission shall, if no appeal has been preferred against such order under the provisions of this Act, be 
final.  
3[24A. Limitation period .—(1) The District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Commission shall not admit a complaint unless it is filed within two years from the date on which the 
cause of action has arisen.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a compla int may be entertained after the 
period specified in sub -section ( 1), if the complainant satisfies the District Forum, the State Comm ission 
or the National Commission, as the case may be, that he had sufficient cause for not filing the complaint 
as this such period:  
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the National Commission, the State 
Commission or the District Forum, as the case may be, records its reasons for condoning such delay.  
24B. Administrative control .—(1) The National Commissi on shall have administrative co ntrol over 
all the State Commissions in t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) calling for periodical returns regarding the institutio n, disposal, pendency of cases;  
(ii) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of uniform procedure in the hearing of matters, 
prior service of copies of documents produced by one party to the opposite parties, furni shing of 
English translation of judgments written in any language, speed y grant of copies of documents;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by 7 of 2017, s. 177 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Ins. by 62 of 2002, s. 21 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003).  
3. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 19 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  22 
 (iii) generally overseeing the functioning of the State Commissions or the District Fora to ensure 
that the objects and purposes of the Act are best ser ved without in any way interfe ring with their 
quasi -judicial freedo m. 
(2) The State Commission shall have administrative control o ver all  the District Fora within its 
jurisdiction in all matters refer red to in sub -section ( 1).] 
1[25. Enforcement of orders of the District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Commission .—(1) Where an interim order made under this Act is not complied with, the District Forum 
or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, may order the property of the 
person, not complying with such order to be attached.  
(2) No attach ment made under sub -section ( 1) shall remain in force for more than three months at the 
end of which, if the  non-compliance continues, the property attached may be sold and out of the proceeds 
thereof, the District Forum or the State Commission or the Nati onal Commission may award such 
damages as it thinks fit to the complainant and shall pay the balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.  
(3) Where any amount is due from any person under an order made by a District Forum, State 
Commission or the Nation al Commission, as the case may be, the person entitled to the amount may 
make an application to the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case 
may be, and such District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commiss ion may issue a 
certificate for the said amount to the Collector of the district (by whatever name called) and the Collector 
shall proceed to recover the amount in the same manner as arrears of land revenue.]  
2[26. Dismissal of frivolous or vexatious compl aints. —Where a complaint instituted before the 
District Forum, the State Commission or, as the case may be, the National C ommission is found to be 
frivo lous or vexatious, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, dismiss the complaint and make an 
order that the complainant shall pay to the opposite party such cost, not exceeding ten thousand rupees, as 
may be specified in the order.]  
27. Penalties .—3[(1)] Where a trader or a person against whom a complaint is made 4[or the 
complainant] fails or omi ts to comply with any order made by the District Forum, the State Commission 
or the National Commission, as the case may be, such trader or person 4[or complainant] shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month but  which may extend to 
three years, or with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to ten  
thousand rupees, or with both:  
5*   *   *   *   *. 
6[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall have the 
power of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the trial of offences under this Act, and on such 
conferment of powers, the Distric t Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the 
case may be, on whom the powers are so conferred, shall be deemed to be a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class for the purpose of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) All  offences under this Act may be tried summarily by the District Forum or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be.]  
7[27A. Appeal against order passed under section 27 .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (2 of 1974), an appeal under section 27, both on facts and on law, 
shall lie from — 
(a) the order made by the District Forum to the State Commission;  
(b) the order made by the State Commission to the National Commission; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 22, for section 25 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by  Act 50 of 1993, s. 20, for section 26  (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
3. S. 27 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof b y Act 62 of 2002, s. 23 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 21 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
5. Proviso o mitted by Act 62 of 2002, s. 23 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
6. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
7. Ins. by s. 24,  ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 23 
 (c) the order made by the National Commission to the Supreme Court.  
(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal shall lie to any court from any order of a District Forum or a State 
Commission or the National Commission.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferr ed within a period of thirty days from the date of 
an order of a District Forum or a State Commission or, as the case may be, the National Commission:  
Provided that the State Commission or the National Commission or the Supreme Court, as the case 
may be, m ay entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if, it is satisfied that the 
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of thirty days.]  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the members of the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission or any 
officer or person acting under the direction of the District Forum, the State Commiss ion or the National 
Commission for executing any order made by it or in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done by such member, officer or person under this Act or under any rule or order made 
thereunder.  
1[28A. Service of no tice, etc.—(1) All notices, required by this Act to be served, shall be served in 
the manner hereinafter mentioned in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The service of notices may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by registered post 
acknowledgment due  addressed to opposite party against whom complaint is made or to the complainant 
by speed post or by such courier service as are approved by the District Forum, the State Commission or 
the National Commission, as the case may be, or by any other means of transmission of documents 
(including FAX message).  
(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the opposite party or his 
agent or by the complainant is received by the District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Comm ission, as the case may be, or postal article containing the notice is received back by such District 
Forum, State Commission or the National Commission, with an endorsement purporting to have been 
made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by t he courier service to the effect that the 
opposite party or his agent or complainant had refused to take delivery of the postal article containing the 
notice or had refused to accept the notice by any other means specified in sub -section ( 2) when tendered 
or transmitted to him, the District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the 
case may be, shall declare that the notice had been duly served on the opposite party or to the 
complainant:  
Provided that where the notice was properly addressed, pre -paid and duly sent by registered post 
acknowledgment due, a declaration referred to in this sub -section shall be made notwithstanding the fact 
that the acknowledgment has been lost or mislaid, or for any other reason, has not been received b y the 
District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, within thirty days 
from the date of issue of notice.  
(4) All notices required to be served on an opposite party or to complainant shall be deemed to be 
sufficiently served, if addressed in the case of the opposite party to the place where business or profession 
is carried and in case of complainant, the place where such person actually and voluntarily resides.]  
29. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing the 
difficu lty: 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 25 (w.e.f. 15-3-2003 ). 24 
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
1[(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Consumer Protection 
(Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002) , the Central Government may, by order, do anything not 
inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002) . 
(4) Every order made under sub -section ( 3) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
2[29A. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to invalidate orders .—No act or proceeding of the 
District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission shall be invalid by reason only of the 
existence of any vacancy amongst its members or any def ect in the constitution thereof.]  
3[30. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions contained in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, clause ( b) of                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 4, sub -section ( 2) of section 5, sub -section ( 2) of section 12, clause ( vi) of                   
sub-section ( 4) of section 13, clause ( hb) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, section 19, clause ( b) of               
sub-section ( 1) and sub -section  (2) of section 20, section 22 and section 23 of this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions contained 
in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) and sub -section ( 4) of section 7, clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) and                      
sub-section ( 4) of section 8A, clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 3) of section 10, clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 13, clause ( hb) of sub -section ( 1) and subsection ( 3) of section 14, section 15 
and clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) of section 16 of this Act.]  
 4[30A. Power of the National Commission to make regulations .—(1) The National Commission 
may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification, make regulations not  
inconsistent with this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regu lations may 
make provisions for the cost of adjournment of any proceeding before the District Forum, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, which a party may be ordered to pay.]  
5[31. Rules and regulations to be laid before ea ch House of Parliament .—(1) Every rule and every 
regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that  the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validi ty of anything previously done 
under that rule or regulation.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 26 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by A ct 34 of 1991, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1991).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 27, for section 30 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 28, ibid. ((w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 29 , ibid., for section 31  ((w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
 
